===== page 1
CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 367-382

 

A SYNOPSIS
OF CANADIAN STRATIFORM COPPER DEPOSITS
IN SEDIMENTARY SEQUENCES

R. V. KirKHAM (*)

ABSTRACT

Stratiform (1) copper deposits in sedimentary sequences have not made significant con-
tributions to Canadian copper production. Nevertheless, sufficient occurrences are known of
this very important geological type of deposit to suggest that some potential exists. Occur-
rences are widely distributed in rocks of many ages but the main ones are found in Carbon-
iferous rocks of the Canadian Appalachians and Proterozoic rocks of the Canadian Shield and

ordillera.

__, Analogous to similar deposits in other parts of the world, Canadian occurrences character-
istically are found in sediments deposited in continental or marginal marine, low latitude,
arid or semi-arid areas. A number of the occurrences, such as those in Mississippian rocks of
the Canadian Appalachians, and Proterozoic rocks of the Seal Lake area Labrador, Copper-
mine River and Redstone River areas, Northwest Territories, and in the Gateway Formation
of the Clark Range of Alberta and British Columbia, have formed in the basal rocks of a
marine transgression following a long period of continental sedimentation.

All deposits and occurrences are found in rocks that postdate oxygenation of the earth’s
atmosphere (about 2 300 m.yr.). Because no bonafide example of this type of deposit has been
found in the extensive, well explored Archean terranes of Canada, a relatively highly evolved
atmosphere seems to have been essential for their formation.

The detailed nature, distribution and significance in Canada of this important geological

type of deposit will not be known until further exploration and studies have been carried
out.

INTRODUCTION

Despite the country’s large size and diverse geology, stratiform copper deposits
in sedimentary sequences have not accounted for significant amounts of Canada’s
copper production. Nevertheless, because this type of deposit is very important
in other parts of the world and favourable geological indications exist in Canada,
an attempt has been made to examine and compile available information on such
stratiform deposits and occurrences throughout the country. This paper is a résumé
of information and impressions gathered to date. It is based on available published

(*) Commission géologique du Canada, Ottawa, Canada.

(1) In this paper “stratiform” is used informally and includes deposits that more accurately
could be termed “concordant” or “penconcordant.” It also refers to some concordant deposits
in metamorphic rocks with layering of questionable origin.

===== page 2
368 R. V. KIRKHAM

and unpublished reports and on many personal cursory examinations of these
deposits and occurrences as part of a broad geological study of Canadian copper
leposits.

There has been only limited exploitation of these deposits and this has been
mainly on metamorphosed ones of questionable origin (e.g. Anglo-Rouyn and
Harvey Hill Mines). In total, only a few million tons of 2 to 3 percent copper ore
have been extracted from such deposits. Even though the immediate future for
exploitation of such deposits is not much brighter, it is hoped that over the long
term major ore bodies of this type will be found in Canada. For example, the
Redstone deposit in the Northwest Territories is large and has good grade sections;
however, its highly faulted nature and very remote location limit its economic
potential.

In Canada, exploration for stratiform copper deposits in sedimentary sequences
has been sporadic and only now are some long term exploration programs being
initiated. Some occurrences have been known for decades but many, even in areas
where the geology is well documented, have been discovered only within the last
fifteen years. This pattern of discovery and the very subtle nature of much of
this mineralization suggest that important deposits could have been missed in
previous investigations.

REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION

Figure 1 shows the distribution of the main deposits and occurrences in
relation to the major geological regions of Canada. It can be noted that deposits
and occurrences are widely distributed in rocks of variable age. Even though
deposits of this type are located in rocks ranging from lower Aphebian age
(about 2 300 m.yr.) to Triassic, most are found in Helikian (about 1 400-1 000 m.yr.)
and Carboniferous rocks. The deposits with Helikian host rocks are localities
numbers 5, 12(?), 14, 15, 16 and 18 (fig. 1) and the ones with Carboniferous host
rocks are localities numbers 1 and 2 (fig. 1).

Most, if not all of the major geological regions shown on figure 1, except those
comprised essentially of Archean rocks (older than about 2500 m.yr.), such as
the Slave and Superior Provinces, probably contain at least a few deposits or
occurrences of this type. Areas such as the eastern part of the Churchill Province
(between the Superior and Nain Provinces on figure 1), which includes the
important Labrador Trough, may contain numerous occurrences of this type even
though no well documented examples have been reported. An area such as
the Labrador Trough contains favourable geological strata that are possibly the
same general age as the iron- and copper-bearing beds in the Marquette region
of the United States. Similarly the lack of occurrences in Arctic areas of Canada
is probably also simply a function of insufficient exploration rather than a real
lack of deposits. Both Proterozoic and Phanerozoic sedimentary sequences in
the Canadian Arctic include numerous units with environments favourable for
the occurrence of stratiform copper deposits.

Nevertheless, the apparent lack of such deposits in Archean areas (older than
about 2 500 m.yr.) is probably real rather than apparent. In these areas the rock
sequences appear to be too old. The older age limit for this type of deposit is in

===== page 3
CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 369

 

 

 

 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

ins] Arctic Coastai Plain Cordilleran Orogen

 

 

 

Pacific Coastal Plain Appalachian Orogen

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Innuitian Orogen

 

 

Arctic Platform

 

 

 

ott) totenior Plastorm Bear Province

 

 

 

 

 

“fe] Hudson Plattorm Stave Province

 

 

 

 

 

 

St. Lawrence Platform [4% A) Churchill Province

 

 

 

 

 

 

> n] Superior Province

 

Southern Province

 

 

34] Grenvite Province

 

 

 

 

 

5d Nain Province

 

 

 

  
 

SLOT

       
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

EX yi HUDSON
gh Oo by SV
at . M0 Kn BAY
oN Ve YY kIT
xt
oy
Ht
M
jj
Fa / “S
“ Pacific’
Continental u, .
Slope Mire
/ Sh
e/ ATES
g
Regional boundary, on land. under water. . ~~."
° Miles 509
et
aaa Rana
° Kilometres 80°
GSC
Fic. 1. — Geological regions of Canada (after Douglas, 1970) and location of stratiform

copper deposits and occurrences; circle indicates deposits in Proterozoic rocks; square indicates

deposits in Paleozoic rocks; triangle indicates metamorphosed deposits of questionable origin.

1, Windsor-Horton Groups; 2, Canso-Pictou Groups; 3, Harvey Hill Mine; 4, Ottawa Area;

3, Seal Lake Area; 6, Richmond Gulf Area; 7, Parry Sound Area; 8, Sault Ste. Marie-Flack

Lake Area; 9, Anglo-Rouyn Mine; 10, Wollaston Lake Fold Belt; 11, Hurwitz Group;

12, Coppermine River Area; 13, Hottah Lake Area; 14, Cap Mountain Area; 15, Redstone
Area; 16, Keele River Area; 17, Minto Area; 18, Clark Range.

rocks about 2 300 m.yr. old, which seems to coincide with oxygenation of the earth’s
atmosphere or “oxyatmoversion” (Roscoe, 1973).

The other major limitation on the distribution of these deposits is the existence
of suitable environments of formation in the host sedimentary sequence. Stratiform
copper deposits in sedimentary sequences, in Canada and elsewhere, characteris-
tically have formed in sediments deposited in low latitude, arid or semi-arid,
continental or marginal marine areas (e.g. Strakhov, 1962; Lombard and Nicolini,
1962; Kirkham, 1973, Renfro, 1974). Areas that do not contain sediments deposited
in such environments seem to be devoid of such deposits.

Many of the major geological regions shown in figure 1 contain large areas of
poorly documented metamorphic rocks. At least a few of these areas probably
contain significant metamorphosed deposits of this type, but at present it is difficult
to anticipate where these deposits might be located.

===== page 4
370 R. V. KIRKHAM

CANADIAN APPALACHIANS

Stratiform copper deposits in sedimentary sequences occur in two main areas
in the Canadian Appalachians—Cambrian and/or possibly uppermost Precambrian
rocks of southeastern Quebec and Carboniferous basins of Nova Scotia, New
Brunswick and possibly Newfoundland.

The Harvey Hill Mine (No. 3, figure 1) which produced minor amounts of
copper and silver in the past and is presently being reopened on a small scale, is
perhaps the best example of this type of mineralization in south-eastern Quebec.
The intensely deformed, recumbently folded, schistose nature of the host rocks
make it very difficult to unravel the geology of this deposit. The main mineralized
zones consist of disseminated chalcopyrite, bornite, chalcocite(?) and minor
amounts of pyrite and molybdenite, conformable with the schistosity, in chloritoid-
muscovite schists. These zones are cut by metamorphic gash veins some of which
contain copper sulphides for as much as 80 feet from the conformable zones.
Similar occurrences are present in a narrow belt that extends more than 150 miles
to the southwest (G. Harron, personal communication).

The numerous occurrences in Carboniferous rocks of Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick (fig. 2) can be divided into two main groups: those which occur in

Figure 2
CARBONIFEROUS GEOLOGY (modified from Howie &
Cumming , 1963) AND COPPER DEPOSITS
NOVA SCOTIA AND, NEW BRUNSWICK

GULF OF ST LAWRENCE

f
fcare BRETON
// 1s.ano,

Chk
efi
ee

TRIASSIC. FUNDY GRP.-clestic segiments and basalt

PENNSLVANIAN - PICTOU, CUMBERLAND GI
ELATIVES: clastic sediments an

PENNSYLVANIAN / MISSISSIPPIAN -
GRPS. & CORRELATIVES: clastic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fic. 2

(2) “Chalcocite” is used in this paper as a field term.

===== page 5
CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 371

Figure 3. Schematic Section Through A Typical
Lower Mississippian Copper Occurrence

gypsum, anhydrite,and salt

red shale and siltstone, minor sandstone

gypsum
red or grey conglomerate

pale grey to buff fossiliferous limestone
medium to dark grey, fine-grained, laminated limestone, with

}oopper MINERALS some stromatolites
Green-grey conglomerate, minor sandstone

red conglomerate / fanglomerate

Pre-Carboniferous basement

 

Fic, 3

lower Mississippian rocks, especially at the contact between the Windsor and
Horton Groups or their stratigraphic correlatives (Binney and Kirkham, 1974),
and those which occur in upper Mississippian and Pennsylvanian rocks (Papenfus,
1931 and Brummer, 1958). The latter group may include deposits in lower Permian
rocks, since the age of the host rocks has not been well established at some
localities. The deposits found at the Windsor-Horton contact are typical of ones
formed in sediments deposited in paralic or marginal environments (ie. the

 

Fic. 4. — (4a) (left) Typical red conglomerate that occurs about 80 feet stratigraphically below
the lower Mississippian copper beds at East Bay on Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia (GSC,
Photo 9-3-73). (4b) (right) Typical dark grey, fine-grained, stromatolitic, laminated basal
Windsor limestone overlying green-grey conglomerate at East Bay, Nova Scotia. Copper
minerals occur in the conglomerate and lowest limestone beds (GSC, Photo 202516-B).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 6
372 R. V. KIRKHAM

“Kupferschiefer-type” deposits of Kirkham, 1973); whereas, most of those formed
in the upper Mississippian and Pennsylvanian rocks are typical “Red-Bed” copper
deposits that occur in sediments deposited in continental environments.

Figure 3 is a typical schematic section through one of the lower Mississippian
copper occurrences. The stratigraphic sequence at most of these copper occurrences
is remarkably similar from one locality to another and consists of a variable
thickness of red conglomerate or fanglomerate (fig. 4a) overlain by a few inches
to a few feet of green conglomerate, in turn overlain by a few inches to a few feet
of dark, fine-grained, laminated, sandy limestone (fig. 4b) which grades upwards
to paler fossiliferous limestone. Evaporites, other clastic rocks and limestones occur
higher in the sequence. Pyrite, chalcopyrite, and, at a few localities, bornite and
chalcocite, are disseminated in the upper part of the green conglomerate and
lower part of the dark, laminated limestone (Binney and Kirkham, 1974). Malachite
is a common weathering product in the upper part of the green conglomerate.

This mineralization has many similarities to the Kupferschiefer and is an
ideal candidate for Renfro’s coastal sabkha model (1974). Schenk (1967), drawing
an analogy to the Persian Gulf, proposed a sabkha, strandline model for these
copper-bearing beds. The base metal mineralization, although characteristically
very sparse, has wide areal extent similar to that of the Kupferschiefer and Marl
Slate. The main differences between this and Kupferschiefer mineralization are
age (Mississippian versus Permian) and the fact that the Carboniferous basins of
eastern Canada were far more irregular and had much more local, paleogeographic
relief than did the Zechstein basin of Europe.

The Walton, Gays River, Smithfield and Salmon River deposits (fig. 2) are
the largest base metal deposits found to date in the Carboniferous basins. The
Walton deposit is a fault-controlled, base metal-barite-silver deposit near the
Horton-Windsor contact (Boyle and Jambor, 1966 and Boyle, 1972). The Gays
River and Smithfield deposits are “Mississippi Valley-type” or carbonate hosted
zinc-lead deposits in the Windsor Group and the Salmon River deposit is a dissem-
inated galena and pyrite deposit in Pennsylvanian sandstones adjacent to a Devo-
nian sialic basement.

Most of the “Red-Bed” copper occurrences in upper Mississippian and Penn-
sylvanian rocks (fig. 2) tend to be erratic and have proved to be of minor import-
ance. They have been described by Papenfus (1931), Brummer (1958) and others.
As in many “Red-Bed” copper deposits chalcocite occurs as a replacement of
woody material, pyrite or carbonate cement in green-grey patches or beds within
a red bed sequence. In only a few of these deposits, such as the Dorchester deposit
in New Brunswick, has the mineralization been demonstrated to have significant
lateral continuity.

CANADIAN SHIELD

Stratiform deposits in sedimentary sequences are widely distributed in Pro-
terozoic rocks of the Canadian Shield (fig. 1). Disseminated pyrite and chalcopyrite
occur in pink and grey quartzites in the Lorrain Formation of the Huronian
Supergroup in the Sault Ste. Marie and Flack Lake areas of Ontario (No. 8, fig. 1).
In the Flack Lake area some gypsum and anhydrite nodules have been noted in
the overlying Gordon Lake Formation. The Lorrain Formation, which contains

===== page 7
 

CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 373

the oldest red beds (about 2 300 m.yr. or Paleoaphebian age) known in Canada,
is also the oldest host rock known to contain this type of copper mineralization.

The occurrences at Parry Sound (No. 7, fig. 1) in the Grenville Province consist
of conformable zones of disseminated chalcocite and bornite in amphibolitic
gneisses of uncertain origin. Conceivably these occurrences could have been early
stratiform deposits in highly metamorphosed Huronian or other Proterozoic strata.

Other deposits in rocks of younger Aphebian age (about 1800-1900 m.yr.)
occur along Richmond Gulf on the east side of Hudson Bay (No. 6, fig. .1) and
in highly metamorphosed sediments in the central part of the Churchill Province
(Nos. 9, 10 and 11, fig. 1). The deposits in the Richmond Gulf area are reported
to comprise disseminated chalcopyrite and pyrite in arkosic sandstones near the
base of Proterozoic strata that unconformably overlie Archean rocks of the
Superior Province.

Numerous occurrences of disseminated copper, lead and zinc minerals have
been found in the highly deformed and metamorphosed Aphebian rocks of the
Wollaston Lake fold belt in Saskatchewan (Pyke and Partridge, 1967; Rath and
Morton, 1969, Sangster and Kirkham, 1974). Similar mineralization has also been
reported to occur in correlative rocks of Manitoba and in rocks of the Hurwitz
Group of the Northwest Territories (No. 11, fig. 1). Host rocks for the disseminated
base metal mineralization are typically highly metamorphosed arkosic sandstones
and conglomerates. Pyrite, sphalerite, galena, chalcopyrite, bornite, chalcocite and
native copper have all been found but in most areas the copper minerals occur
separately from the lead and zinc minerals, though at one locality galena and
chalcopyrite are present together in large boulders. At a number of localities the
sulphide mineralization appears to occur near older basement areas.

The Anglo-Rouyn Mine (No. 9, fig. 1) also occurs in highly metamorphosed
rocks of the central Churchill Province (fig. 1). The preproduction reserves were
2 million tons of ore grading 2.4 percent copper (Forsythe, 1972) and about 0.03
to 0.05 ounces per ton gold (J. Randall, personal communication). The deposit
consists primarily of boudinaged, concordant zones of disseminated chalcopyrite,
pyrite and pyrrhotite in calc-silicate gneisses and meta-arkoses. Forsythe (1972)
suggested that it is an epigenetic, fault-controlled deposit; however, the writer
suggests that it was initially a disseminated stratiform deposit that has been sub-
jected to intense deformation and metamorphism resulting in significant local
redistribution and recrystallization of sulphides. Even if a pre-metamorphic origin
can be demonstrated the genetic affinities are still much in doubt. The significant
gold content is not typical of stratiform copper deposits in sedimentary sequences
and the deposit could conceivably have had volcanic rather than sedimentary
affiliations.

The deposits in the Seal Lake area of Labrador (No. 5, fig. 1) are Helikian
in age (about 1 250 m.yr.) and those in the Coppermine River area (No. 12, fig. 1)
are either Helikian or Hadrynian in age (1 200-600 m.yr.). In both areas the deposits
are remarkably similar to the important White Pine deposit in the Keweenaw
Peninsula (Ensign et al., 1968; White, 1971; Brown, 1971).

The deposits in the Seal Lake area have been described by Brummer and
Mann (1961) and Gandhi and Brown (1974); some of the comparable occurrences
in the Coppermine River area have been described briefly by Kirkham (1970).
In both areas the copper occurs in the first green-grey marine beds that overlie
a thick sequence of flood basalts and red beds (figs. 5, 6 and 7). The underlying
flood basalts are noted for their numerous minor copper occurrences. Although

===== page 8
 

374

 
   
 

ted quartzite

red and green

 
 

cupriferous beds

  
   
 
    
  
 

 

basaltic lavas

and interlayered

diabase sills in
red and grey
quartzites and
shales

basaitic lavas

  
  
 

 

with

  
  
    

interlayered

R. V. KIRKHAM

shales and quartzite

red beds

about 5,000 feet

quartzite and conglomerate

 

 
  
   

about 1,000 metres

 

 
     

Fic. 5. — Generalized section through the

Seal Lake Group in Labrador showing posi-

tion of cupriferous beds (adapted from
Gandhi and Brown, 1974).

 

 

 

Fic. 6. — Generalized geological map of the Coppermine River area, Northwest Territories
(adapted from Baragar and Donaldson, 1973), showing the location of copper occurrences in
the Rae Group.

===== page 9
CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 375

 

 

   
     
   
 
    
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[Thick
Era |Group  |ness Lithology
grey-green
ec sandstone,
s Rae 1,200 siltstone,
£ | Group | feet shale
® eypriferous
| = beds
t nconformity~
!
| red
Sandstone,
| 4,000] siltstone
feet and
| terlayered
It
| § | Copper- ese
| mine |
' = | River
2 Group
©
® t
2 mm Pasaltic
10,000] lava
feet flows
I
r
| Figure 7.Columnar Section Showing
Position of Cupriferous
Beds in Coppermine River Area

Fic. 7

only subeconomic concentrations of chalcopyrite, bornite, and chalcocite have been
found in the sedimentary rocks at both localities, the regional geology, tectonic
setting, stratigraphy, age and the position of the cupriferous sediments are all
remarkably similar to those of the Keweenaw Peninsula.

INTERIOR AND ARCTIC PLATFORMS AND INNUITIAN BELT

Only minor amounts of copper mineralization have been discovered to date
in the Interior and Arctic Platforms and the Innuitian belt (fig. 1). At Hottah Lake
(No. 13, fig. 1) disseminated chalcocite occurs in lower Paleozoic grey shale inter-
layered with red and green shales, bituminous dolomite with minor chalcopyrite,
and sandstone (Thorpe, 1971). Minor occurrences of copper mineralization have
also been reported in Proterozoic, Silurian, Devonian and Permo-Carboniferous
strata at remote localities in Arctic Platform and Innuitian belt, but few data are
available on these occurrences.

The interior Paleozoic basins of Canada were probably not major sites for
copper deposition, although on first inspection they seem to contain many sedi-
mentary units favourable for stratiform copper deposits. The carbonate units and
multicycle, clean quartz sands that characterize these basins were, for the most

===== page 10
376 R. V. KIRKHAM

part, deposited far from any immature terrigenous area that might have provided
suitable geochemical sources for copper. The Hottah Lake and Ottawa localities
occur along the margins of the basins where copper could have been derived,
directly or indirectly, from adjacent basement areas. On the other hand the
diverse geology and tectonic history of Arctic areas with more varied possible
sources and depositional sites for copper indicate a significantly higher potential.

CANADIAN CORDILLERA

Although there is some indication of stratiform copper mineralization in
Paleozoic and Mesozoic strata of the Canadian Cordilleran region, most of the
known mineralization occurs in Proterozoic rocks of Helikian age (about 1 000 to
1400 m.yr.).

In the northern Cordillera stratiform copper mineralization occurs at Cap
Mountain (Aitken et al., 1973) and in the Redstone River (Coates, 1964; Watson
and Mustard, 1973), Keele River and Minto areas (fig. 1). At present little is
known about the mineralization at Cap Mountain or the Keele River area but
important deposits are known in the Redstone River and Minto areas.

In the Minto area, chalcopyrite, bornite, secondary copper minerals, minor
pyrite and magnetite with significant amounts of precious metals occur in layered
biotitic gneisses of a migmatite complex. The origin of these deposits is very much

Figure 8. GEOLOGY OF THE REDSTONE AREA
(modified after Gabrielse et al.,1973)

 

LEGEND

Drift covered area

Paleozoic
Undivided, mainly Devonian

 

 

Haydrynian
Rapitan Grp.- purple and green
mudstone, conglomerate, and
minor iron formation

Matic intrusion

 

 

Helikian (2)
Coppercap Fm.- dark grey to
buff limestone and calcareous
siltstone

Redstone River Fm.- red
siltstone

 

Pre-Redstone River Formations

Copper occurrence

Fault —+— Anticline

Thrust —+— Syncline
Fault

Bedding

5 Miles”

 

 

Kilometres

Fic. 8

===== page 11
 

CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 377

RAPITAN FM. 2000- purple and green muds tone
7000+ conglomerate and minor iron formation
feet

unconformity

   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 

COPPERCAP FM. ooo limestone and calcareous siltstone
feet

Co —$— —$— $ $5 $a i —__
REDSTONE Xe

RIVER FM. 0- red siltstone, minor anhydrite

1500 and gypsum

feet

 
 

LITTLE DAL FM. 300+ dolomite, minor siltstone, slate
feet and conglomerate

 

Fic. 9. — Schematic section through copper-bearing strata in the Redstone River area,
Northwest Territories (adapted from Gabrielse et al., 1973).

in doubt but, despite the very potassic nature of the host rocks and the relatively
high gold content, there is a possibility that these are highly metamorphosed,
remobilized stratiform deposits in metasedimentary rocks. Clarification of the origin
and nature of these deposits must await further studies.

Figures 8 and 9 show the general geology and stratigraphy in the vicinity of
the Redstone deposit. Copper mineralization of variable grade and thickness has
been traced continuously for more than four miles along the face of Coppercap
Mountain (fig. 10a) and has been found 20 miles to the north where the copper

 

cote

Fic. 10. — (10a) (left) View from the south of the Coppercap Formation (light) overlying

the Redstone River Formation (dark) on the south end of Coppercap Mountain, Northwest

Territories. The copper-bearing beds occur at the top of the Redstone River Formation

(GSC, Photo 202516-A). (10b) (right) Typical specimen of pale, fine-grained, silty, carbonate

grainstone copper bed showing delicate climbing ripples and a calcite concretion, Redstone

River area, Northwest Territories. The dark spots are disseminated chalcopyrite. Note that
the bed is not carbonaceous (GSC, Photo 201963-B).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 12
378 R. V, KIRKHAM

beds are exposed again. Pyrite, chalcopyrite, bornite and chalcocite occur dis-
seminated in four to six pale, green-grey, silty carbonate grainstones and calcareous
siltstone beds at the top of a thick sequence of red siltstones of the Redstone River
Formation (fig. 10a). The red beds are characterized by small channel structures
with suncracked mudstone partings. The copper-bearing beds, which are not notice-
ably carbonaceous (fig. 10b) are overlain by laminated and massive shaly and
sandy, pyritic, dark, fetid limestones of the Coppercap Formation. Some dessic-
cation cracks and algal laminations are present in the lower limestone beds. The
Coppercap Formation is unconformably overlain by the Rapitan Group that is
thought to be of Haydrynian age (Gabrielse et al., 1973). On a regional scale,
Gabrielse et al. (1973) have suggested that most of the underlying Coppercap and
Redstone River Formations have been eroded beneath the sub-Rapitan uncon-
formity. Minor copper mineralization occurs at the base of the Rapitan Group
at many localities.

The structure in the vicinity of the Redstone deposit is extremely complex.
Numerous minor and major low-angle and high-angle faults of late Mesozoic age
cut the copper-bearing strata; and Proterozoic faulting probably also took place
in the district between the times of deposition of the Coppercap Formation and
the overlying Rapitan Group.

Copper deposition evidently occurred in basal marine sediments that trans-
gressed a very broad alluvial plain. Although the actual copper-bearing beds are
not carbonaceous, the fetid conditions in the overlying carbonates probably pro-
vided suitable anoxic, sulphurous conditions necessary for copper deposition.

The last main area to be discussed is the Clark Range in southern Alberta
and British Columbia (figs. 11 and 12). Analogous to equivalent Belt rocks in
the United States (Harrison, 1972; Clark, 1971), numerous stratiform copper
occurrences are known in various units of the Purcell sequence (Morton et al.,
1973).

Most work done to date has been concentrated on copper sulphide occurrences
in the Grinnell Formation which is the stratigraphic equivalent of the Revett
Formation in Montana (Price, 1964; Harrison, 1972) that contains the important
Spar Lake deposit. Copper occurrences in the Grinnell Formation typically consist
of erratically disseminated chalcocite or other copper sulphides in the pure white
quartzite members of an otherwise red clastic sequence. The copper shows a
marked preference for beds that were probably the most permeable ones in the
formation. Sand-filled mudcracks, analogous to those described by Garlick (1967)
at Mufulira and by Glennie (1970) in modern inland sabkhas, are common features
associated with the white quartzite beds. Quite possibly these were aeolian or
reworked aeolian sands that came to rest in sabkhas. At some time soon after
sedimentation these permeable sands could conceivably have become saturated
with copper-bearing brines. The erratic nature of the mineralization could have
been caused by fluxuations of the water table and the resulting variations in Eh-pH
conditions. At a few localities copper has also been remobilized into the contact
zones of diabase dykes.

In the Gateway Formation copper sulphide mineralization, more characteristic
of paralic marine sediments, occurs in thin but extensive green-grey and buff silt-
stone beds with mudcracks and salt casts that occur near the top of a red bed
sequence. Unlike the mineralization in the Grinnell Formation this mineralization
is persistent over large areas.

===== page 13
CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 379

  
  
 

 
 

senfa

  
 
 

Riri OUT Mg
ip?
12 >

 
 
 

 

Ly

    
 
 

6

   

flathead ®

 
     

1430 —

 
      

*

  

4 6
SCALE CIS MILES

cA Missoulo Group @ Stratabound Cu (Ag)

{Purcell—Roosville Fms) \@ Stratobound Zn-Pb (Cu) + International boundory

Wm Middle Belt Carbonate Trace of fold oxis = Provincial boundary

(Syeh Fm)

Rovalli Group *
ppekunny-Grinnell Fm) ag ©

_
-

eT Normal Foult 7 National Park boundary
<~ Theust Foult 2 Dip and Strike of bedding

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fic. 11. — Geological sketch map of the Clark Range, southern Alberta and British Columbia,
showing locations of principal stratabound Cu (Ag) and Zn{Pb (Cu) occurrences (after Morton
et al., 1973).

===== page 14
380 R. V. KIRKHAM

Base Metal Occurences

CulAg) Soge Creek, SE. BC. Sst

  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
 

MISSOULA

GROUP Cu Forum|ake, B.C. calc siltstones

Cu_N.Koot-N. Lost Creek, Alta - dol. Sst. Table Mt, Alta-silty dol, Woll-Forum Lk, BC. sst
Zn Pb (Cu) N Koot-NLost Ck, Alo dal Sit (Table & Gladstone Mins Alta -silty do
altered basolt (?) Spionkop Ridge, Alta- silty dol.)

Cu (Kennco} Alta- pebbles in block shales , Storvotion Creek, B.C.
MIDDLE
BELT
Carbonate

 

Cu Starvation Creek B.C., Kennco- Yorrow- Spion. black shole on pebbles

Zn Pb (Ag) Blind Canyon Creek, Alta- dolomite (2)

ula Yorrow- Smith Creeks, Alta- sandstones , Commerce Peak ,8.C: - Se Story. Ck. Ssh
CulAg] Kishenena Ck, 8.C- Sst. Kishenena Ck- Sst)
RAVALLI Co Yarrow - Smith Cks, Alto - Sst, Commerce Peak,BC.- Sst

Cu (Zn, Ag) Yarrow Ck.,Alto - sandstone

GROUP

 
 
 
 
 
     
 

LOWER
BELT or
Pre-RAVALLI

GROUP
Fort Steele Fm.

Fic. 12. — Generalized stratigraphic section of Precambrian rocks and stratabound base
metal occurrences in the Clark Range (after Morton et al., 1973).

CONCLUSIONS

Stratiform copper mineralization in sedimentary sequences is widely distributed
in Canada but it has not yet been of major economic importance. It occurs in rocks
of diverse nature ranging in age from Paleoaphebian to Triassic. The most signifi-
cant mineralization discovered to date, as in other parts of the world, occurs in
the basal rocks of a marine transgression following a long period of continental
sedimentation. These and other paralic marine sediments, as well as some conti-
nental sediments, seem to offer the most immediate potential for major copper
deposits of this type. Exploration and studies of these deposits in Canada are still
in their infancy and it is apparent that much further work is necessary before a
reasonable idea of their distribution and importance can be ascertained.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The writer gratefully acknowledges G. Harron and J. Carriére for drafting the
diagrams and his colleagues at the Geological Survey of Canada and many other
individuals for numerous, open, fruitful discussions about these deposits.
D. F. Sangster and G. B. Leech kindly read the manuscript and made many useful
suggestions.

===== page 15
CANADIAN STRATIFORM DEPOSITS 381

References

AITKEN, J. D., MACQUEEN, R. W. and Foscotos, A. E. (1973). — A Proterozoic sedimentary
succession with traces of copper mineralization, Cap Mountain, Southern Franklin
Mountains, District of Mackenzie. Report of Activities, Part A, April to October, 1972.
Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 73-1, Part A, p. 243-246.

Baracar, W. R. A. (1969). — The geochemistry of Coppermine River basalts. Geol. Surv. Can.,
Paper 69-44,

Baracar, W. R. A. and Donatpson, J. A. (1973). — Coppermine and Dismal Lakes map-
areas 86 O and 86 N. Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 73-39. Lo.

Binney, W, P. and KirKHaM, R. V. (1974). — A study of copper mineralization in Missis-
sippian rocks of Nova Scotia. Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 74-1, Part A, p. 129-130.

Boye, R. W. (1972). — The geology, geochemistry, and origin of the barite, manganese, and
lead-zinc-copper-silver deposits of the Walton-Cheverie area, Nova Scotia. Geol. Surv.
Can., Bull. 166, 181 p.

BoyLe, R. W. and Jamsor, J. L. (1966). — Mineralogy, geochemistry, and origin of the
Magnet rove barite-sulphide deposit, Walton, N.S. Can. Min. and Met. Bull., Vol. LXIX,
p. 394-413.

Brown, A, C. (1971). — Zoning in the White Pine copper deposit, Ontanagon County,
Michigan. Econ. Geol., Vol. 66, p. 543-573. .

Brummer, J. J. (1958). — Supergene copper-uranium deposits in northern Nova Scotia. Econ.
Geol., Vol. 53, p. 309-324. :

BRUMMer, J. J. and Mann, E. L. (1961). — Geology of the Seal Lake area, Labrador. Geol.
Soc. Amer. Bull., 72, p. 1361-1382.

Ciark, A. L. (1971). — Strata-bound copper sulfides in the Precambrian Belt Supergroup,
northern Idaho and northwestern Montana. Soc. Mining Geol. Japan, Spec. Issue 3,
p. -267.

Coates, J. A. (1964), — The Redstone Bedded Copper deposit and a discussion of the origin
of red bed copper deposits, unpublished M. Sc. thesis, Univ. B.C., 75 p.

Douctas, R. J. W. (1970). — Introduction. Geology and economic minerals of Canada.
Geol. Surv. Can., Econ. Geol. Rept., 1, p. 1-8. .
Epen, J. G. VAN (1974). — Depositional and diagenetic environment related to sulphide

mineralization, Mufulira, Zambia. Econ. Geol., Vol. 69, p. 59-79.

Ensicn, C. Q., Jr., et al. (1968). — Copper deposits in the Nonesuch Shale, White Pine,
Michigan, Ore deposits of the United States, 1933-1967, Ed. J. D. Ridge, Vol. 1,
P. 460-488.

ForsytuE, L. H. (1972). — Anglo-Rouyn Copper Mine, Ore Bay, Lac La Ronge, Saskatchewan.
Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., Vol. 83, p. 3405-3414.

GaprIELseE, H., Roppicx, J. A. and Biusson, S. L. (1973). — Flat River, Glacier Lake, and
Wrigley Lake map areas (95E, L, M), District of Mackenzie and Yukon Territory.
Geol. Surv. Can., Mem. 366, 153 p.

Ganpui, S. S. and Brown, A. C. (in preparation). — Cupriferous shales of the Adeline Island
Formation, Seal Lake Group, Labrador. Econ. Geol.

Garuick, W. G. (1969). — Special features and sedimentary facies of stratiform sulphide
deposits in arenites, Sedimentary ores, ancient and modern. Pro. 15th Inter.-Univ. Geol.
Con., Special Pub. No. 1, p. 107-170.

GLENNIE, K. W. (1970). — Desert Sedimentary Environments. Amer. Elsevier Pub. Co. Inc.,
New York, 222 p.

Harrison, J. E. (1972). — Precambrian Belt basin of northwestern United States: its geometry,
sedimentation, and copper occurrences. Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., Vol. 83, p. 1215-1240.

Howir, R. D. and Cumminc, L. M. (1963). — Basement features of the Canadian
Appalachians. Geol. Surv. Can., Bull. 89, 18 p.

KirkuaM, R. V. (1970). — Some copper occurrences in younger sedimentary rocks of the
Coppermine River area, Northwest Territories, Report of Activities, Part B. Geol. Surv.
Can., Paper 70-1, p. 57-63.

KirkuaM, R. V. (1973). — Environments of formation of concordant and penecordant copper
deposits in sedimentary sequences (abstract). Can. Mineralogist, Vol. 12, Part 2, p. 145-146.

Lomparp, J. and NicoLint, P. (1962). — Search for the characteristics that are most frequently
associated with copper stratiform mineralizations in Africa. Stratiform copper deposits in
Africa. Sym. Ass. of African Geol. Surv., p. 205-212.

===== page 16
 

382 R. V. KIRKHAM

Morton, R., Gostr, E. and Gosxe, R. J. (1973). — Sulfide deposits associated with Pre-
cambrian Belt-Purcell strata in Alberta and British Columbia, Canada. Belt Symposium,
Vol. 1, p. 159-179.

Parenrus, E. B. (1931). — “Red bed” copper deposits in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.
Econ. Geol., Vol. 26, p. 314-330.

Price, R. A. (1964). — The Precambrian Purcell System in the Rocky Mountains of southern
Alberta and British Columbia. Bull. Can. Pet. Geol., Vol. 12, p. 399-426.

Pyke, M. W. and Partripce, E. F. (1967). — Occurrences of base metal mineralization along
the Wollaston-Sandfly Lakes trend, northern Saskatchewan. Min. Sym. sect., Saskatchewan
Ind. Expo. and Min. Sym., Regina, 14 p.

Ratu, U. and Morton, R. D. (1969). — Base metal occurrence in the Wollaston Lake belt
of northern Saskatchewan. Can. Inst. Mining Met. Buil., Sept. 1969, p. 961-966.

REnFro, A. R. (1974). — Genesis of evaporite-associated stratiform metalliferous deposits—a
sabkha process. Econ. Geol., Vol. 69, p. 33-45.

Roscoz, S. M. (1973). — The Huronian Supergroup, a Paleoaphebian succession showing
evidence of atmospheric evolution. Huronian Stratigraphy and Sedimentation, Geol.
Assoc. Can., Spec. Paper 12, p. 31-47.

SancstTer, D. F. and Kirxuam, R. V. (1974). — Disseminated base metal mineralization along
the Wollaston Lake fold belt, Saskatchewan. Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 74-1, A, p. 143-144.

ScuENK, P. E. (1967). — The significance of algal stromatolites to paleoenvironmental and
chronostratigraphic interpretations of the Windsonian Stage (Mississippian), Maritime
Provinces. Gol. Assoc. Can., Spec. Paper 4, p. 229-243.

StrakHov, N. M. (1962, trans. 1970). — Accumulations of Cu-Pb-Zn; their origin and distribu-
tion in arid regions. Principles of Lithogenesis, Vol. 3, New York, Plenum Press, p. 22-81.

Tuorre, R. I. (1971). — Mineral exploration and mining activities, mainland Northwest
Territories, 1966-1968. Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 70-70, p. 57.

watson, I. M. and Mustarp, D. K. (1973). — The Redstone bedded copper deposit (abstract).
Sym. Sed. Geol. and Min. Dep. of the Can. Cordillera, Geol. Ass. Can., p. 20-22.

Wuite, W. S. (1971). — A paleohydrologic model for mineralization of the White Pine copper
deposit, northern Michigan. Econ. Geol., Vol. 66. p. 1-13.

