===== page 1
CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 383-393

PERMIAN COPPER SHALES
OF SOUTHWESTERN UNITED STATES

Kenneth S. JOHNSON (*)

ABSTRACT

Many stratiform copper deposits are known in Permian shales and sandstones of Texas,
Oklahoma, and Kansas, but the most important of these are six copper-shale ore bodies
exposed in the Flowerpot Shale and San Angelo Sandstone along a total distance of some
200 km in Oklahoma and Texas. Individual ore bodies range from 15 to 45 cm thick and
cover about 30 km?. Chalcocite is the primary ore mineral, and malachite is the main
oxidation product. The average grade of different deposits is 1 to 2 % copper: other metals are
present only in small amounts, generally less than 500 ppm.

The flat-lying ore beds are medium-gray laminated silty shales that are interbedded with
red-bed clastics and evaporites. One ore body is being strip mined, another is being
developed, and the other four are being prospected.

The host shales apparently were deposited in a brackish-water or shallow-marine environ-
ment, and syngenetic or early diagenetic copper mineralization might have occurred by
replacement of pyrite.

INTRODUCTION

Permian sedimentary rocks crop out over a substantial part of the south-
western United States, with some 2000 meters of red beds and evaporites being
the major constituents in north Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas. Reddish-brown
shales, siltstones, and sandstones are interbedded with gypsums and thin dolomites
on the outcrop, whereas thick sequences of salt (halite) are interbedded with red
beds and gypsum in the subsurface.

Copper minerals have been noted in these red beds since the middle of the
19th century (Marcy, 1854; Fath, 1915; Richard, 1915; Fischer, 1937; Merritt,
1940). Chalcocite and malachite are the most common minerals, occurring in
sandstone and shale as encrustations, impregnations, veinlets, small nodules, and
mineralized wood. The few early attempts at mining resulted in failure, owing to
the lean grade of ore and the small size of deposits, but a new concept of copper
mineralization was introduced in 1962 with discovery of malachite disseminated in
a persistent 18-cm-thick shale bed along an outcrop distance of 5 km at Creta in

 

(*) Oklahoma Geological Survey, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma,
U.S.A.

===== page 2
384 KENNETH S. JOHNSON

southwestern Oklahoma (Ham and Johnson, 1964). Initially called the “lower
copper bed,” with a copper content of 2.6 to 4.5 % at the outcrop, it was the first
United States report of a bedded copper shale in Permian strata.

Eagle-Picher Industries began mining and milling operations at Creta in 1965,
and this set off a wave of prospecting in Permian beds throughout Oklahoma and
adjoining parts of Texas and Kansas. To date, the Creta deposit is the only copper
shale being mined in the region, but several other significant discoveries in the three
States attest the likelihood that other stratiform copper deposits will be brought
into production.

PALEOGEOGRAPHY AND STRUCTURAL SETTING

The study area is on the east side of the Permian basin, a broad epicontinental
sea that covered much of the southwestern United States during the middle of
Permian time (fig. 1). The sea was approximately 650 km wide and 1 100 km long,
and was connected with the open ocean to the south via the Delaware and Midland
basins of west Texas and adjacent New Mexico. Surrounding the sea were semiarid
or arid lands of low relief from which clay, silt, and sand were eroded. Epeirogenic
movements caused slow but continual sinking of the crust beneath the inland sea
and permitted accumulation of thick sequences of reddish-brown shales and inter-
bedded evaporites. The Wichita uplift, part of which is now exposed as the Wichita
Mountains in southwestern Oklahoma, was a more stable crustal block, extending
westward beneath the sea.

The copper-bearing Flowerpot Shale, as well as the underlying San Angelo
(Duncan) Sandstone and overlying Blaine Formation, was deposited in and ad‘acent
to a transgressing sea whose shoreline retreated to the east and southeast. Lateral

LOCATION MAP

 

Fic. 1. — Paleogeography and principal facies in Permian basin of southwestern United
States during evaporite deposition in middle Permian time.

===== page 3
PERMIAN COPPER SHALES OF S.W. U.S. 385

 
   
   

DOG CREEK SHALE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

WoNBLAINE FORMATION

 

 

 

 

XXKXAXK

FLOWERPOT SHALE
XXXXX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

FLO. = DUNCAT
XRXXK HENNESSEY SHALE

Rss Gypsum and shale Cy Shale, mainly red brown

Sandstone, mudstone
conglomerate and shale

 

jetta Salt (halite) and shale

 

 

 

 

 

XXX Copper mineralization

 

LOCATION MAP

Fic. 2. — Stratigraphic cross section showing copper mineralization in Permian strata of
southwestern Oklahoma and north Texas.

facies changes from east to west (from land to sea) are: (1) deltaic and alluvial
sandstones and mudstone conglomerates interbedded with shale; (2) brackish-water
and marine reddish-brown shale with thin beds of gray shale, gypsum, and siltstone;
and (3) an evaporite facies of interbedded gypsum, shale, salt, and dolomite.
Outcrops of the San Angelo (Duncan) Sandstone comprise a deltaic-alluvial facies,
those of the Flowerpot Shale comprise a brackish-water and marine facies, and the
Blaine Formation represents an evaporite facies (fig. 2). Each of these formations is
commonly 30 to 60 m thick. Clays and sands in the Flowerpot and associated
formations were derived from the largely concealed Ouachita Mountain system
of Texas and southeastern Oklahoma: the nearby Wichita Mountains were suf-
ficiently buried by earlier Hennessey time that they contributed little or no detritus
to the Flowerpot.

Outcropping rocks on the east side of the Permian basin are essentially flat
lying. They have been disturbed only by small-scale block faulting (throws of 3 to
30 m) and gentle folding, and dips are typically less than one-half degree: no
evidence of mineralization has been found associated with faults or folds. Beneath
the copper-shale outcrops are 1000 to 4000 m of Paleozoic sedimentary rocks
resting unconformably upon a basement complex of Cambrian and Precambrian
igneous and metasedimentary rocks. The full section of Paleozoic strata has been
penetrated in oil and gas tests at many places, and evidence of magmatic or hydro-
thermal activity following Middle Cambrian time in any part of the region is
lacking. The Wichita Mountains comprise granites, rhyolites, and gabbros emplaced
in Middle Cambrian time, 525 to 535 million years ago (Ham, Denison, and Merritt,
1964).

===== page 4
386 KENNETH S. JOHNSON

STRATIGRAPHY

The principal formations related to copper-shale occurrences in the region are,
in ascending order, San Angelo (Duncan) Sandstone, Flowerpot Shale, and Blaine
Formation (fig. 2). They have an aggregate thickness of 150 m and are of late
Leonardian or early Guadalupean age.

The San Angelo consists of light-gray and reddish-brown sandstones, silt-
stones, and mudstone conglomerates interbedded with reddish-brown and greenish-
gray shales. It has an interfingering contact with the overlying Flowerpot Shale
and is a deltaic and alluvial deposit that grades laterally to shale westward into the
Permian basin. The name “San Angelo” is applied to the unit in north Texas and
in Oklahoma south of the Wichita Mountains, whereas equivalent and similar
strata north of the Wichitas are called “Duncan.” The outcrop thickness of both
the San Angelo and the Duncan is generally 20 to 50 m.

The Flowerpot Shale, which contains the main copper shales, consists mainly
of reddish-brown shale with thin interbeds of gypsum, dolomite, siltstone, sand-
stone, and greenish-gray shale. It crops out in southern Kansas, western Oklahoma,
and north-central Texas (fig. 3). In the subsurface to the west, about 50 m of rock
salt and salty shale are interbedded in the upper part of the formation. The total
thickness of the formation is typically 30 to 60 m in outcrops throughout the
region.

| Permian (post-Blaine)

Blaine-Flowerpot-

  
  

San Angelo (Duncan)
Permian (pre-San

— a j ZY Yd ZB nnaeio)

Copper-shale deposits:

  
 

St
x
x|
nw
3}

t

o

a
«

1. Mangum
t 2. Creta
| Amarillo ‘ 3. Medicine Mounds
e '
4. Crowell
i | 5. Buzzard Peak
| 1 6 Old Glory
1
I ss
|
\
t 1
| '
\ LOCATION MAP
300 KM \
Fic. 3. — Areal extent of Permian outcrops in southern Kansas, western Oklahoma, and

north-central Texas.

===== page 5
PERMIAN COPPER SHALES OF S.W. U.S. 387

Most Flowerpot strata apparently were deposited in marine or brackish water.
Evaporite beds, each 1 to 100 cm thick, aggregate about 15 % of the top half of
the formation in most outcrops: gypsum makes up 80 to 90% of these thin
evaporites, and the remainder is light-gray microgranular dolomite. In north Texas,
gypsum beds 1 to 5 m thick made up much of the Flowerpot. Flowerpot strata
grade southeastward into deltaic and alluvial deposits, which are now eroded at
most places.

Shales of the Flowerpot are typically reddish brown, blocky, slightly silty,
gypsiferous, and lacking in fossils. About 85 % of the shale is red brown, and the
remaining 15 % is light gray, green gray, and medium gray: red-brown beds are
commonly 0.3 to 2 m thick, whereas gray beds are mostly 0.1 to 0.5 m thick and
generally underlie thin evaporites.

The Blaine Formation consists chiefly of thick beds of pure gypsum inter-
stratified with reddish-brown shale; thin beds of dolomite and greenish-gray shale
typically underlie each of the separate gypsum layers. Evaporites in the Blaine
were deposited during the maximum transgression of the sea before its regression
in later Dog Creek time. The thickness of the Blaine Formation ranges from 20 m
in the north (Kansas) to 60 m in southwestern Oklahoma and Texas.

COPPER MINERALIZATION

Copper is known in Permian shales and sandstones at more than 100 separate
localities in Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas. Although the number of occurrences
of mineralization in sandstone is by far more abundant, the sites of shale mineraliza-
tion are of greater economic significance (Ham and Johnson, 1964; Stroud and
others, 1970; Lockwood, 1972; Johnson and Brockie, 1973; Dingess, in preparation;
and Smith, in preparation). The first copper-shale discovery was the Creta deposit
in southwestern Oklahoma, and it alone is now being mined (by Eagle-Picher
Industries, Inc.): the Creta deposit also has been investigated most thoroughly.
A second find by Lobaris Copper Company south of Mangum in Oklahoma is being
investigated, and so also are four other significant copper shales in Texas at sites
near Medicine Mounds, Crowell, Buzzard Peak, and Old Glory (fig. 3).

Creta District

Preliminary outcrop study of the Creta deposit established that an 18-cm-thick
Copper-bearing shale in the upper part of the Flowerpot Formation extended 5 km
along the outcrop, and that the grade ranged from 2.6 to 4.5 % copper (Ham and
Johnson, 1964). Subsequent core drilling and exploration by Eagle-Picher estab-
lished that chalcocite is the primary ore mineral under moderate overburden, and
that an ore body averaging 2.3 % copper (undiluted) could be strip mined (Johnson
and Brockie, 1973; Dingess, in preparation).

The ore bed, called the Prewitt copper shale, is a medium-gray silty shale and
mudstone containing chalcocite as the primary ore mineral and malachite and other
oxidized copper minerals at and near the outcrop. It ranges in thickness from 8 to
30 cm and averages about 18 cm. The Prewitt bed is about 12 m below the top

===== page 6
 

388 KENNETH S. JOHNSON

of the Flowerpot Shale and is about 2.5 m below the thin but persistent Marty
Dolomite (fig. 4).

The ore bed consists of two basic lithologies: the upper 10 to 13 cm is
laminated, thereby differing petrologically from other gray shales in the Flowerpot,
whereas the lower 8 to 10 cm is blocky shale, generally resembling other shales in
the Flowerpot. Silt laminae in the upper part of the bed commonly are 0.1 to
0.2 mm thick and constitute 10 to 20 % of the unit. Thin-section study reveals that
the ore bed consists mostly of microcrystalline clay minerals. Quartz grains, chiefly
10 to 40 y in diameter, make up 10 to 20 % of most of the samples. Much of the
quartz floats in a clay matrix. According to Lockwood (1972, appendix 5), the
laminated and blocky parts of the ore contain an average of the following mineral
components: quartz (17 % in laminated shale and 26 % in blocky shale), gypsum
(28 and 3 %), illite (45 and 63 %), chlorite (5 and 6 %), and chalcocite (4 and
2%). Other analyses indicate that the ore bed also contains 0.1 to 3 % carbonate
minerals, chiefly dolomite and some calcite: the organic carbon content ranges
from 0.09 to 0.56 % and averages 0.3 %, or about twice as much as in non-
cupriferous shales of the region.

Principal copper minerals in the Creta deposit are chalcocite (Cu2S) and
malachite [CuCO3 . Cu(OH).]. Chalcocite, the primary ore mineral, occurs mainly
as small grains (commonly 2 to 20 4) disseminated in the shale. Grains are also
concentrated in some silt laminae in the upper part of the bed, and they also are
concentrated in thin veins and fill small vugs in the blocky part of the bed. As seen
in thin section, many of the grains have a cubiform outline and presumably are

   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Composite COPPER-SHALE CORRELATIONS, CRETA AND MANGUM DISTRICTS
Strotigraphic
Section South North
4 Creta District Mongum District
2 *A *8 *d wE
4 <3 KM >| ph <- 5KM
w Haystack
2 Sypsum °
a Bed =
a m
L =
a ©. oS
' 1 —
> =
3-
4
5 2
Meters
3
a|é&
=| 8
& -
3 3 ~
5 5 Meters pei
eis
gs EXPLANATION
3 El
Sis .
z Shale, greenish-gray Copper Mineralization:
: EEA Dolomite to medium-gray
Major occurrence
- , K °y
KX Rock Gypsum Shale or siltstone, (I-3 % copper)
i Fa] SyPsiferous shale CA retin “brown Minor occurrence
Choney or siltstone (<0.6 % copper)
L-* Srom

RST oped

Fic. 4. — Stratigraphy of the upper Flowerpot copper shales in southwestern Oklahoma.

===== page 7
PERMIAN COPPER SHALES OF S.W. U.S. 389

pseudomorphs after pyrite. Malachite and brochantite [CuSO,.3 Cu(OH),] are
oxidation products found on the outcrop where the overburden is less than 3 m:
malachite occurs as films and granules, and brochantite occurs with malachite in
nodules locally present on the outcrop.

The grade of the Prewitt bed in the mined sulfide zone averages about 2.0 %
copper and ranges from about 0.5 % to as much as 4.5 % copper. Other metals,
Present only in low concentrations (Lockwood, 1972, appendix 6), include lead
(10-50 ppm), silver (10-50 ppm), cobalt (10-50 ppm), nickel (30-60 ppm), uranium
(50-100 ppm), vanadium (75-150 ppm), and zinc (150-400 ppm). Further examination
of Lockwood’s data indicates that lead values are a little higher in the ore bed
than in the overlying or underlying “barren” shales that contain only 0.1 to 0.3 %
copper, and, conversely, that the silver, zinc, cobalt, nickel, and vanadium con-
centrations are somewhat lower in the ore bed than in the adjacent “barren” shales:
these observations apply in both the Creta and the Mangum deposits.

Only copper is recovered in the mining and milling process, but a small amount
of silver is recovered from the concentrates at the smelter. Another copper shale,

SCHEMATIC CROSS SECTION
PA THROUGH COPPER MINE

   

Original land surface

   

500 Meters

   
 
  

 

 

COLUMNAR SECTION

     
 

EAGLE-PICHER
8! COPPER MILL-

 

FLOWERPOT
SHALE

 

  

2.

Cry sci

WILE

Fic. 5. — Schematic map, cross section, and columnar section showing principal features of

Prewitt copper shale and overlying rock units at Eagle-Picher Industries mine at Creta. Map

shows areas where ore bed has shale and gypsum overburden of 0-16 m (dense stippling) and
greater than 16 m (light stippling).

===== page 8
390 KENNETH S. JOHNSON

 

Fic. 6. — Oblique aerial photograph of Eagle-Picher Industries copper-shale strip mine at
Creta. Highwall here is 13 m high.

just 1.5 m above the Prewitt bed, is thinner (2 to 10 cm thick) and is lower in
grade; it appears to be economically minable only in the extreme northern part
of the reserve area.

Eagle-Picher began mining and milling operations in 1965 (fig. 5). The present
reserve area extends about 5 km north-south and 2.5-3.0 km east-west, although
mineralized shale with some economic: potential underlies a total area of some
30 km?. Increasing depth of overburden becomes a limiting factor along the
western edge of the reserve area. As much as 20 m of overburden has been
removed in places. Strip mining is favored by the gentle westward dip of 2 to 4m
per km and the lack of faults or folds in the area (fig. 6). The company’s 1 000-ton-
per day mill is designed to recover sulfide minerals and a portion of the nonsulfide
minerals by flo‘ation.

Mangum District

The second major copper-shale discovery in Oklahoma was made in 1965 about
25 km north of Creta, near the town of Mangum, by Lobaris Copper Company.
The Mangum deposit is similar to the Creta deposit, but it occurs in a slightly
higher bed of the Flowerpot Formation.

The ore bed, called the Meadows copper shale, is a medium-gray laminated

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 9
 

PERMIAN COPPER SHALES OF S.W. U.S. 391

silty copper-bearing shale and mudstone. It is 9 to 11 m below the top of the
Flowerpot and about 2 m below the thin Marty Dolomite (fig. 4). The thickness
of the Meadows bed ranges from 10 to 45 cm, averaging about 30 cm, and it is
the middle part of a green-gray shale which at the top and bottom is blocky and
without significant copper. Mineralization in the Meadows bed extends about
10 km north-south and as much as 5 km east-west.

Petrographically, the Meadows bed is somewhat similar to the Prewitt bed at
Creta. Lockwood (1972, appendix 2) determined the following average mineral
components: quartz (27 %), gypsum (11%), illite (49 %), chlorite (5%), and
malachite (3 %). More recent data show that organic carbon comprises an average
0.17 % of the ore bed and that dolomite and some calcite commonly make up
about 5 to 10 % of the bed.

Malachite is the dominant copper mineral known so far, because nearly all
the testing done to date has been at the outcrop or under only several meters of
overburden. Chalcocite has been identified at several test localities under 3 to
5 m of overburden, and it seems likely that it is the dominant primary ore mineral
throughout most of the deposit.

The grade of the Meadows bed at the outcrop and in shallow test pits averages
about 1 % copper and ranges from 0.5 to more than 2 %, copper. Lockwood (1972,
appendix 3) found other metals commonly in the following low concentrations:
lead (20-90 ppm), silver (25-45 ppm), cobalt (15-40 ppm), nickel (35-65 ppm),
uranium (70-100 ppm), vanadium (100-140 ppm), and zinc (300-400 ppm).

Strata in the Mangum district dip westward gently at 2 to 4 m per kilometer and
are not disturbed by faults or folds. It is possible that the deposit could be strip
mined in the same manner as the Creta deposit.

Copper Shales in North Texas

The several copper-shale deposits in north Texas have undergone initial stages
of exploration, but only a small amount of information has been released to date.
Deposits explored include those referred to as the Medicine Mounds, Crowell,
Buzzard Peak, and Old Glory prospects. They extend a total of 150 km along the
outcrop of Flowerpot and San Angelo strata in Texas (fig. 3).

Ore beds are typically 15 to 45 cm thick, and different beds average 20 to
25 cm. Individual deposits are traceable for 3 to 10 km along the outcrop (generally
north-south or northeast-southwest) and appear to be 1 to 4 km wide (east-west).
Ore beds are shales and mudstones associated with gypsum and dolomite; they
appear similar in most respects to the deposits at Creta and Mangum.

Chalcocite is the primary ore mineral, and oxidation products at and near the
outcrop are malachite and azurite. The copper content of individual deposits
averages between 1 and 2%, although at various locations the copper content
ranges from 0.5 to about 6 %. There is no indication of significant concentrations
of other metals with these deposits.

Ore bodies are flat lying or dip gently to the west, and there is no indication
of faulting, folding, or hydrothermal activity associated with any of the deposits.

Copper mineralization in Texas occurs at several stratigraphic levels. Some
copper shales are in the upper part of the Flowerpot Formation (as they are in
Oklahoma), but other mineralized shales occur in the lower part of the Flowerpot
and in the underlying San Angelo Sandstone. Precise correlation between the

===== page 10
392 KENNETH S. JOHNSON

Oklahoma and Texas ore bodies must await further field study and detailed
stratigraphic analysis.

Copper in Sandstones

In addition to the important mineralization in shales, there are many known
copper occurrences in alluvial and deltaic sandstones in the Permian of Texas,
Oklahoma, and Kansas (Merritt, 1940; Hill, 1967; Stroud and others, 1970).
Copper minerals are commonly associated with carbonized fossil wood and pyrite
in the standstone channels.

Copper occurs not only in the San Angelo and Duncan Sandstones but also
in the older Permian (Leonardian) standstones of the Wichita and Clear Fork
Groups in Texas and equivalent sandstones in Oklahoma and Kansas. Sandstone
bodies are commonly lenticular or channelized, and mineralization is difficult to
trace laterally because of rapid facies changes. Although the grade of cupriferous
sandstones might range up to 10 or 15% copper in some samples, the erratic
distribution of copper has prevented profitable mining of these deposits.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Six known copper-shale ore bodies crop out over a distance of some 200 km
in the Permian of Oklahoma and Texas. Ore deposits are typically about 20 cm
thick, are elongated north-south or northeast-southwest (subparallel to the inferred
Permian shoreline), have dimensions of about 10 km by 3 km, and cover about
30 km2. At all sites copper alone is present in significant quantities, with chalcocite
being the primary ore mineral and malachite being the main oxidation product.
Outcropping strata dip gently to the west into the Permian basin, and there are no
structural features believed to be related to the ore bodies. Furthermore, there is no
evidence of hydrothermal activity anywhere in the region during or following
deposition of the Permian sediments.

The higher concentration of sulfide minerals, the medium-gray color of the
shales, and the preservation of laminations suggests that the copper shales were
deposited in a reducing environment devoid of scavenging or burrowing animals:
perhaps they were laid down in a lagoon or a shallow sea-floor depression where
exchange of water was restricted by subtle features on the sea floor.

Sulfur-isotope ratios reported by Lockwood (1972) show a wide range in values
of sulfides from the Creta deposit; he concluded that the sulfide ions were produced
by bacterial reduction of sulfate ions in the sea water, and that the reduction could
have been either syngenetic or diagenetic. The presence of chalcocite pseudomorphs
after pyrite suggests that copper minerals might have replaced iron sulfide minerals
that had been deposited earlier. The continuous lateral distribution of high con-
centrations of copper sulfide in thin beds with low permeability supports the idea
that copper was emplaced in the host shales syngenetically or at an early stage of
diagenesis.

===== page 11
PERMIAN COPPER SHALES OF S.W. U.S. 393

References

Dincess, P. R. (in preparation). — Geology and ore deposits of the Creta copper operations
of Eagle-Picher Industries, Inc.

Fatu, A. E. (1915). — Copper deposits in the “red beds” of southwestern Oklahoma. Econ.
Geology, Vol. 10, p. 140-150.

Fiscuer, R. P. (1937). — Sedimentary deposits of copper, vanadium-uranium, and silver in
southwestern United States. Econ. Geology, Vol. 32, p. 906-951.

Ham, W. E., DeNtson, R. E. and Merritt, C. A. (1964). — Basement rocks and structural
evolution of southern Oklahoma. Oklahoma Geol. Survey Bull., 95, 302 p.

Ham, W. E. and Jounson, K. S. (1964). — Copper in the Flowerpot Shale (Permian) of the
Creta area, Jackson County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma Geol. Survey Circ., 64, 32 p.

Hit, W. E., Jr. (1967). — Copper in redbeds of south-central Kansas. In : Short papers on
research in 1966, Kansas Geol. Survey Bull., 187, Part 1, p. 13-14.

Jounson, K. S. and Brocxi, D. C. (1973). — Eagle-Picher Industries, Inc’s copper mine at
Creta. Stop 10 in : Johnson, K. S. and Denison, R. E., Igneous geology of the Wichita
Mountains and economic geology of Permian rocks in southwest Oklahoma. Oklahoma
Geol. Survey, Guidebook for field trip No. 6 of Geol. Soc. America annual meeting in
Dallas, Nov. 1973, p. 29-32.

Lockwoon, R. P. (1972). — Geochemistry and petrology of some Oklahoma redbed copper
occurrences. Oklahoma Univ. unpub. Ph.D. dissertation, 125 p.

Marcy, R. B. (1854). — Exploration of the Red River of Louisiana in 1852. Executive
Document, 33rd U.S. Congress, 1st Session, p. 391-393.

Merritt, C. A. (1940). — Copper deposits in the “red beds” of Oklahoma. Oklahoma Geol.
Survey Mineral Report, 8, 19 p. (unnumbered).

Ricuarp, L. M. (1915). — Copper deposits in the “red beds” of Texas. Econ. Geology, Vol. 10,
p. 634-650.

Situ, G. E. (in preparation). — Sabkha and tidal-flat facies control of red-bed copper deposits
in North Texas.

Stroup, R. B., MCMauHan, A. B., Stroup, R. K. and Hippsuman, M. H. (1970). — Production
potential of copper deposits associated with Permian red bed formations in Texas,
Oklahoma, and Kansas. U.S. Bur. Mines Report Inv., 7422, 103 p.

===== page 12

