===== page 1
 

CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 235-254

SOME ASPECTS

OF THE STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS
OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT
AND THEIR GENETIC SIGNIFICANCE

A. E. ANNELS (*)

ABSTRACT

In recent years the concept of synsedimentary precipitation of copper-iron-(cobalt) sulphides
for the stratiform deposits of the Zambian Copperbelt has become widely accepted by many
Zambian based mine Geologists and others who have studied these deposits. However, recent
work by the author has led him to hold very grave doubts on the ability of this theory to
satisfactorily explain the facts.

Though the presence of anhydrite in the potentially mineralized horizons of the Lower
Roan Group has long been recognized, and has been used as an environmental indicator, its
significance as far as ore genesis is concerned has apparently been missed. Whether the ore
bearing host rock be arenite, argillite or siltstone, an antipathetic relationship can be
demonstrated between copper and/or iron sulphides on the one hand, and anhydrite on the
other. Evidence is presented which indicates that some, if not all, of the sulphides formed
at the expense of anhydrite, whether this mineral was originally in nodular form or occurred
as an interstitial cement.

A geologic model is proposed to explain the genesis and localization of the Copperbelt
mineralization. This model, which bears close similarities with those proposed for Mississippi
Valley type deposits, is based on the diagenetic evolution of depositional basins containing
both carbonaceous and sabkha facies.

Other factors, such as the distribution of cobalt, and the tectonic evolution of the present
structural basins, are examined and their genetic implications discussed.

INTRODUCTION

In very few papers has any reference been made to the presence of anhydrite
in the Lower Roan Group of the Katanga System. Garlick (1964 and 1972) and
Davis (1954, p. 608) describe lateral secretion veins of metamorphic origin where
anhydrite is associated with quartz, felspar, carbonate and either specularite, in

(*) Department of Mineral Exploitation, University College, Newport Road, Cardiff CF 2,
ITA, U.K.

===== page 2
 

236 A. E, ANNELS

the footwall formations, or sulphide (mainly chalcopyrite and pyrite), in the
mineralized formations. Similar veins containing anhydrite and sulphide are found
in the Basement Complex at Mufulira but are generally more quartz rich. Garlick
(1972, p. 285) gives the impression that these are also the products of lateral
secretion and were derived from the overlying Lower Roan metasediments. How-
ever, it seems more likely that they are older hydrothermal veins as the wallrock
shows distinct chloritic and epidotitic alteration. At Mufulira such veins are
entirely restricted to the Basement and appear truncated at the unconformity.
Darnley (1960, p. 149) records the presence of large anhydrite plates which
ophitically enclose detrital grains in the lower part of the Mufulira Section. Garlick
(1967, p. 132) mentions that the lower and upper parts of the C orebody at Mufulira
contain nodules or lenticles of anhydrite up to 10 cm in diameter and states that,
“The anhydrite of the concretions is angular and generally clear of inclusions,
but ubiquitously a concentration of sulphide grains, similar in composition to the
disseminated sulphides in the adjacent rock coats the nodule.” He suggests that
they are sedimentary or diagenetic nodules, the evidence being the lack of replace-
ment of the host rock. He goes on to say that, “Similar anhydrite nodules or
concretions with peripheral sulphide concentrations are common in certain
horizons in the shale deposits, particularly at Roan Extension, Nkana and Cham-
bishi.” In a more recent paper (1972, p. 284) Garlick realizes the environmental
significance of the presence of anhydrite by stating that “The abundance of
anhydrite proves that the shales were deposited in a highly saline environment
with local super-saturation of calcium sulphate...” Indeed, he came very close to
recognizing its genetic significance when he stated that, “On the 1450 level at

   
  
  
   
 

Possible connection
with Fitula-Konkola
Ore -Shale Basin.

Granite

 

 

Lufubu shist

 

 

Basement Complex
Hill, immediately
ms below or close

to base of Ore
Shale

Festal

HB virccizan
“ore shale

Da tecorore
penal
tonal

54a True Thickness of
Ore Shale In metres

Postulated
PALEOGEOGRAPHY OF THE ORE-SHALE — Shoreline

FORMATION

(Basement
's/ Complex -Lower
Roan contact

68

SCALE
Miles 2 4 biles

Kilometres 20 2 6 6  BKilomatres

Pes.

 

 

===== page 3
STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 237

Nkana, the anhydrite occurred as lenses in the low grade argillite...,” and later
by pointing out that “It occurs as ... nodules in the ore horizons in the Lower
Roan, whether they be argillite or arenite, mineralized or barren, but it is generally
more common near the margins of the orebody and in the adjacent barren rock.”

THE ANHYDRITE-CARBONATE-SULPHIDE ASSOCIATION

The possible role of anhydrite in relation to the formation of sulphides was
first recognized by the author in 1968 when RST’s Prospecting Division was drilling
what subsequently proved to be a subeconomic and rather deep copper-cobalt
deposit close to the northeastern margin of the Chambishi Basin, between Zam-
Anglo’s Mindola and RCM’s Chambishi orebodies (fig. 1). Because of the low,
sub-economic grade of this deposit, referred to as Nkana North Limb, it was pos-
sible to examine a process which clearly had not gone to completion as it is
believed to have done at the operating mines. Also, as this deposit straddles the
transition zone in the ore-shale formation between the carbonaceous argillites of the
deeper water facies and the argillite-siltstone facies of the littoral zone (see fig. 1),
the effects of lithological changes could be examined.

At Nkana North Limb the mineralization lies within siltstones, argillites,
dolomitic argillites, and argillaceous dolomites, which surround a large mass of
talcose dolomite. This dolomite is capped by a colony of oncolite stromatolites and
is believed to be a biohermal structure (Annels, 1972). Immediately to the west
of this bioherm a dolomitic carbonaceous argillite appears just above the more
dolomitic basal portion of the ore-shale (fig. 2). The upper half of the ore-shale
consists of argillite and siltstones which may show well defined banding or even
lamination. Within the mineralized lower portion of this unit there occur numerous
lenses of carbonate and quartz which contain, or are surrounded by, sulphides.
These lenses, which are most abundant to the southeast of the bioherm, are between
1 and 3 cm long and 0.5 and 1.5 cm high. As the economic hangingwall of the
mineralization is approached, cores of sulphide-free, granular anhydrite appear.
Initially these are only in the larger lenticles but eventually they also appear in the
smaller ones. Above the zone of visible sulphide mineralization the entire lenticle
consists of anhydrite. These anhydrite lenticles are identical in size to the carbonate
lenses of the main ore zone, except that they have undergone more compaction.

N
Sf sLubumbashi

~ \ etre \
ShingotaS— >Mutuira
rKi

Index map for figure 1

  
  
   

i oe Kalutugty / !\Ndola,

‘ uanshya

1 Area covered by
! Enlarged Map

i *Kapiri Mposhi
i Kab

i 50 190150200 Miles

: SCALE

‘ 50 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 Kilometres

===== page 4
 

238 A. E. ANNELS

This probably reflects the low competence of the anhydrite relative to carbonate
and quartz indeed, as the proportion of the former mineral in the lenticle decreases,
so does the degree of elongation parallel to the bedding. The host rock shows
deformation of the bedding traces around both the anhydrite and carbonate-quartz
lenticles which is suggestive of growth in a relatively soft sediment prior to complete
compaction.

Perhaps one of the most significant occurrences in the uppermost portions of
the ore-shale is the simultaneous appearance of carbonate and sulphide, usually
pyrite, at the margins of anhydrite nodules. Only when the peripheral rim of pyrite
is well developed and there is a wide continuous zone of carbonate replacement
around the nodules do significant quantities of pyrite appear in the host sediment.
Plate 4 shows a lenticle that is completely replaced by carbonate and has a con-
tinuous pyrite rim. Similarly the first chalcopyrite to appear is found at the lenticle
margins as an encrustation, and locally a replacement of, the rim-pyrite. Within the
main mineralized zone the lenticle may be completely replaced and the central
cavity infilled with chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite. It seems fairly clear that the first
formed sulphide was pyrite but later, as competition for the available sulphur
increased with the precipitation of copper sulphides, pyrrhotite was formed. Both
chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite show mutual contacts and enclose and replace the early
subhedral or euhedral pyrite grains.

Within the bornite zone of the deposit the lenticles do not possess a pyrite rim,
indeed pyrite and bornite appear incompatible. This antipathetic relationship also
appears to hold true for all Copperbelt orebodies. The bornite and chalcopyrite are
dispersed through the entire nodule or within the marginal replacement zone, if
an anhydrite core still exists (see plate 1).

Fringe of ore- shale

  

Thickness of carbonaceous shale incursion

a Lp

Fic. 2. — Copper distribution relative to bioherm and carbonaceous argillite.

===== page 5
 

STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 239

At Nkana North Limb the evidence suggests that a large proportion of the iron
sulphides were formed during the replacement of anhydrite by carbonate. Estima-
tion of the relative amounts of the two minerals was made by counting grid inter-
sections superimposed on cut core. The results from this study for all the drill
holes in the area were contoured as in figure 3. This diagram shows that the pyrite
rich areas of the ore-shale coincide with a zone of high replacement (i.e. >60 %)
while the pyrite-pyrrhotite rich area, to the northwest, roughly corresponds to an
area in which replacement is between 80 and 100 % complete. There is thus a
correlation between the amount of replacement which has taken place and the
amount of iron sulphide present. Drillhole NN 15 (fig. 4), also reveals a close
relationship between pyrite-rich zones and the abundance of lenticle carbonate
vertically through the ore-shale.

Figure 3 also shows that the zone of high copper metal content (> 15 metre per-
cent) east of the bioherm, approximately corresponds with a zone of high lenticle
replacement. Where iron sulphides occur in quantity the copper sulphides show
a less obvious correlation with the presence of lenticle carbonate. However, where
they are absent, or sparsely developed, as in drillhole NN 23 (fig. 5), the correlation
between copper sulphides and lenticle carbonate is good.

The richest mineralization to the west of the reef is at the base of the carbon-
aceous argillite horizon and in the upper part of the basal dolomites of the ore-
shale (see NN 15, fig. 4). This mineralization is in concordant and transgressive
veins rather than as disseminations. To the southeast, the carbon content of the
argillite decreases and this horizon becomes a dolomitic argillite or calc-biotite

  
 

  
  

DOLOMITIC =BiOHERM

  
   

60.
KD

7 // WV \

Fic. 3. — Sulphide zones relative to % carbonate replacement of nodules.

===== page 6
240 A. E, ANNELS

    

NN23 148!'—~ B

SS a

  

PLATE 1. — Anhydrite nodule with peripheral replacement zone consisting of calcite-bornite
and chalcopyrite. Sulphides disseminated throughout calcite zone but absent from anhydrite
core.

schist. At the same time, abundant nodules and almost enterolithic masses of
anhydrite appear which are extensively replaced and heavily mineralized (see
NN 23, fig. 5), as are the enclosing meta-sediments. There is thus an inter-relation-
ship between the appearance of a carbonaceous argillite interbed, the decrease in
the quantity of nodular anhydrite or carbonate, and the decrease in the amount of
copper (see fig. 2).

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 7
| STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT

 

Anhydrite present

H/W Quartzkte

241

 

°f. Carbonate lenticles

 

 

   
   

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

4 3 2 kc] 0 5 1 15 ~ 2 » 35
“he Cu T GEOLOGY KEY
SS
Argillite
Sparse == Laminated Argillite
aeonwent j fttstone
J Quartzite
y Z coomte
g
y ‘calcareous Argillite
4 =r: Interbedded
Y Dolomite & Argillite
] Carbonaceous
Y) = Argillite
ge
Vp
WO
d
| 7
| Z
gy
)
Y
Y
y)
y)
-
A Last lenticle
Cz
Te
GZ etre
@ | Unters ered ness)
Z| .
Cl ORE-SHALE DRILLHOLE NNIS

 

 

 

F/W Conglomerate

Fic. 4

Carrollite shows an extremely close affinity with carbonate in general, but in
particular with lenticle carbonate. The area in which carrollite has been identified
corresponds with that in which lenticles are most abundant, i.e. to the southeast

of the bioherm.

 

===== page 8
242 A. E, ANNELS

 

|

‘le Carbonate lenticles,
5.) 5 DO 2% H 3 4p
GEOLOGY KEY

Anhydrite present
ite

 

Argillite
| Laminated Argillite

= siltstone

Sparse

   
  

Relatively
Abundant

Ca - Carrollite “* Quartzite

Dolomite

Calcareous Argillite

Calcareous Biotite
Schist

 

Silty Argillite

 
   

 

 

 

i eH

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

| 1 Metre
Intersected
Y {inter thickness)

a
ORE-SHALE DRILLHOLE NN23
I F/W_ Conglomerate

Fic. 5

 

SK

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Microscopic studies show that the contact between anhydrite and carbonate
phases in a lenticle is a replacive one. Rounded and corroded residual grains of
anhydrite occur enclosed in the carbonate, which also penetrates the anhydrite
along cleavages and intergrain boundaries.

===== page 9
STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 243

THE LENTICLE CARBONATE

There is reason to believe that at Nkana North Limb the carbonate which
formed initially at the expense of the anhydrite was dolomitic in composition.
However, as the reef margin is approached, replacive calcite appears at the
margins of the lenticles, particularly at their apices (see plate 4). Calcite may
occur also at the centre of dolomite lenticles where it displays the characteristics
of a cavity infilling. Close to the reef calcite is the dominant constituent and around
the southeastern margin of this mass it is the sole constituent. The change from
100 % calcite to 100 % dolomite takes place in as short a distance as 200 m. The
replacive or late stage character of the calcite suggests that it may be metamorphic
in origin. The association of calcite with phlogopitic mica and the replacement
of K felspar by calcite near the reef, suggests that calcite and the mica were

 

PLATE 2. — Ellipsoidal Cavities — Chambishi Ore-Shale.

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 10
244 A. E, ANNELS

formed at the expense of dolomite and K felspar. Such a de-dolomitization process,
however, only took place in the vicinity of the reef margin.

SECONDARY FELSPAR

The following conclusions concerning the secondary felspars associated with
sulphides and carbonate lenticles are based on thin section studies of material
from both Chambishi and Nkana North Limb. These felspars may be enclosed in
the outer carbonate rim or, together with quartz, form a halo around the lenticle.

(a) The amount and type of felspar in the lenticles can differ markedly from
that in the surrounding host rock. Microcline can be the dominant secondary felspar
in the host rock, while albite (An7_9) is dominant in the lenticle or vice versa.

(b) Where lenticles contain pyrite alone the associated felspar is microcline.

(c) Where lenticles contain chalcopyrite (or bornite) alone then the associated
felspar is albite.

(d) Where pyrite and chalcopyrite occur together both albite and microcline
may coexist but microcline is usually dominant.

Pyrite aggregates in the host rock are frequently surrounded by microcline and
quartz. Albite may accompany the microcline but is never found as the sole
secondary felspar around pyrite. It is also closely associated with lenses and bands
of coarsely crystalline calcite in the host rock.

Though there is an apparent relationship between the appearance of copper
sulphides and the appearance of secondary albite, there is no quantitative linear
correlation. Maps of metre-percent copper for the entire ore-shale around the
Nkana North Limb reef and for the distribution of secondary albite are, however,
remarkably similar. Analyses for sodium within the ore-zone show increases from
0.05 % to >1.0 % (weight %) as the reef is approached and in the vicinity of
the 10 metre percent copper contour. Similarly the sparsely mineralized hanging-
wall argillites show a two- to threefold increase in sodium content in the same
direction. These observations cannot be readily explained if the ores are considered
to be of syngenetic origin. It should, however, be pointed out here that a similar
relationship between sodium and copper has not been described for the larger
deposits of the Copperbelt.

LENTICULAR CARBONATE IN OTHER DEPOSITS

Though anhydrite nodules and carbonate-sulphide lenticles were both recog-
nized in the ore-shale in the past, it seems that even though they show remarkably
similar shapes, they were never associated. This may be because the transitional
stage so well displayed at Nkana North Limb was not exposed by mining develop-
ment elsewhere.

Garlick (1967, p. 132) states that “Concretions of dolomite... occur only
rarely in the shale type ore, where these nodules contain small biotite flakes and
aggregates of chalcopyrite or other sulphide.” This is not the case in the carbon-

===== page 11
STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 245

 

PLATE 3. — Lenticles in carbonaceous argillite — Mwambashi Ore-Shale.

aceous argillite facies which, as can be seen in plate 3, is heavily charged with
small carbonate-quartz nodules rimmed with pyrite. The majority of drillholes
intersecting this facies in the Chambishi Basin revealed an abundance of such
nodules. The author has collected examples of carbonate-quartz lenticles rimmed
with, and including, chalcopyrite and pyrite from drillholes in the deeper inter-
sections of the Chambishi orebody itself, which like Nkana North Limb, is in the
argillite-siltstone facies of the ore-shale. Such lenticles may not have been recog-
nized at Chambishi, because, as is shown in plate 2, they have been completely
leached out at shallow depths leaving an ellipsoidal cavity lined with grains of
sulphide and quartz. Similar lenticles occur at Roan Extension in the Luanshya
Basin.

 

 

 

 

===== page 12
246 A. E, ANNELS

ANHYDRITE-CARBONATE RELATIONSHIPS IN ARENITES

Anhydrite has been recorded as constituting a cement to the Footwall
Quartzites at Mufulira. Garlick (1972, p. 292) considers that it formed interstitially,
or as concretions, during exposure of muddy sand flats or from detrital gypsum
accumulated with wind blown dune sands. He records as much as 35 % anhydrite
in some laminae of the “aeolian” sandstones. In the same paper he states that,
“Deposition of sandy muds with considerable anhydrite or gypsum terminated the
‘A’ graywacke deposition.” Darnley (1960, p. 149) mentions that the poikiloblastic
interstitial habit of anhydrite in the Footwall Quartzites, “...closely resembles
that of the interstitial carbonates. ...”

 

PLATE 4. — A dolomite-quartz lenticle with rim of pyrite. Some dolomite crystals show

clouded cores (carbon?). Alizarin-red staining has revealed the presence of secondary calcite

as darker areas at the apices of the lenticle. Specimen from drillhole NN 15, Nkana North
Limb.

 

Prate 5. — Unmineralized anhydritic arenite patch within mineralized dolomitic arenite.
Sharp contact between the two is emphasized by a pencil line. The sulphide is chalcopyrite.
Specimen from the footwall of the B orebody, Mufulira.

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 13
STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 247

At Mufulira there is a very marked antipathetic relationship between interstitial
anhydrite and copper mineralization (Annels, 1973). The orebodies themselves
contain variable but often relatively large quantities of interstitial dolomite,
anhydrite being conspicuously absent, except as late veinlets or pods. However,
towards the economic footwalls of the “B” and “C” orebodies, and possibly also
of the “A” orebody (stratigraphically the youngest), there are irregular patches or
bands of sparsely to un-mineralized arenite within the lower grade, often chalco-
pytitic, basal zones of the orebodies (see plate 5). These patches are characterized
by a lower carbonate content and show a mauve to pink colouration due to the
presence of anhydrite. Similarly in the barren anhydritic footwall rocks there are
light grey transgressive patches of mineralized arenite. Careful sampling and
analysis of some of these coexisting mineralized and “barren” arenites produced
the following results:

 

Cu% Anhydrite % Dolomite %

Mineralized arenite 1.7-3.0 0-5.0 8-13
“Barren” arenite <0.3 19-25 2-7

 

The margins of the above mentioned light grey mineralized transgressive patches
are very sharply defined, as can be seen in plate 5, and are unrelated to changes
in the original sediment type. These patchy rocks do not represent slump breccias
as traces of bedding pass uninterrupted through both the light-grey and pink
arenites. The very sudden disappearance of anhydrite is marked by the equally
sudden appearance of copper sulphides.

Work on the anhydrite-carbonate-sulphide relationships at Mufulira is still at
an early stage, but recent drilling across the fringes of the combined B/C orebody
has revealed that the barren or sparsely mineralized portions of the “Inter B/C
Quartzite” including the “Banded Shales and Quartzites“ immediately above the |
“Mudseam,” are often highly anhydritic. Similarly, recent intersections of the “A”
horizon, which were un-mineralized, proved to be highly anhydritic.

Returning to the Nkana North Limb deposit in the Chambishi Basin we find
that the “Footwall Conglomerate” beneath the ore-shale and the coarse, gritty
feldspathic arenites in the hangingwall, both contain interstitial anhydrite where
unaffected by recent groundwater movements. However, as the biohermal mass is
approached, the upper and lower limits of visible copper mineralization in the ore-
shale rise and drop respectively, so that close to this body they are within the
arenite and conglomerate respectively. Where this has occurred petrographic studies
show that the original interstitial anhydrite is almost entirely replaced by calcite.

SIGNIFICANCE OF ANHYDRITE-CARBONATE RELATIONSHIPS

It is envisaged that the original nodular anhydrite formed during early dia-
genesis under conditions of supersaturation of CaSO,. These may have existed in
either a supratidal sabkha environment or in sediment at the centre of a basin in
which dense, CaSO, saturated bottom waters were accumulating. During advancing
diagenesis, still under relatively low temperature conditions, the anhydrite was

===== page 14
248 A. E. ANNELS

replaced by carbonate thus liberating sulphur which was then utilized in the pre-
cipitation of diagenetic sulphides, initially pyrite. However, the presence of co-
existing anhydrite and calcite in metamorphic secretion veins without evidence of
replacement of one by the other, indicates that at more elevated temperatures the
two phases were stable. Cross-cutting masses of quartz-carbonate-chalcopyrite-
anhydrite do occur in the basal dolomites of the Nkana North Limb ore-shale. Here
the sulphides and anhydrite co-exist without an intermediate carbonate phase.
These masses are similarly interpreted as being of metamorphic origin.

At Roan Extension diagenetic nodules of anhydrite or gypsum after anhydrite
(a post-mining phenomena) are found near the hangingwall of the orebody. These,
however, are surrounded by a discontinuous rim of chalcopyrite without inter-
mediate carbonate. This at first presented a problem until it was noted that sulphide
concentrations at the rims lay adjacent to depleted areas within the very finely
disseminated chalcopyrite mineralization of the host rock. This is strongly sug-
gestive of a metamorphic secretion phenomena.

A drillhole intersection of the ore-shale close to the Nkana North Limb bio-
herm also showed unaltered anhydrite lenticles surrounded by well developed rims
of sulphide close to the economic hangingwall. However, careful search failed to
reveal sulphide depletion around the lenticles.

It thus appears that, on the evidence from both Roan and Nkana North Limb,
it was possible for some nodules to escape replacement during diagenesis and hence
take no part in the mineralization process, even though the surrounding sediment
was enriched in sulphides. During diagenesis or metamorphism these nodules
merely provided a surface on which sulphides could accumulate. It is suggested that
the cause of replacement was not a metamorphic process but one which was
patchily operative at the lower temperatures existing during diagenesis. As tem-
peratures increased and rock porosity decreased under increasing depth of burial,
reaction between interstitial brines and anhydrite slowed down and eventually
ceased. Either portions of the ore-shale (i.e. towards the hangingwall) were not
penetrated by these brines or the reactive constituent was completely depleted by
reaction with anhydrite elsewhere (e.g. lower in the ore-shale).

Perhaps the main implication of the above observations is that at least some of
the metals must have been in a mobile non-sulphide form during diagenesis. We
have the evidence of upward and downward migration of metals as the Nkana
North Limb bioherm is approached together with the replacement of early dia-
genetic anhydrite by carbonate. One begins to wonder as a result, whether any of
the sulphide, with the possible exception of some of the pyrite in the carbonaceous
argillites, was synsedimentary as proposed by Garlick (1961).

NATURE OF THE REPLACEMENT PROCESS

There are two possible processes which could explain the replacement of
anhydrite by carbonate and the resulting liberation of sulphide ions.
(1) BacTERIAL REDUCTION

Anaerobic bacteria, such as Desulfovibrio -desulfotomaculum and desulfu-
ricans, break down SO, during their metabolic process to retrieve oxygen and in

===== page 15
 

STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 249

the process release H2S and CO, . Such bacteria need not only a plentiful supply of
SO, but also decomposing organic matter, both of which would be available in the
carbonaceous argillite facies of the Chambishi Basin. This process would not, of
course, take place at high temperatures.

(2) INORGANIC REDUCTION

In the literature hydrocarbons have been recorded in association with ore
deposits either as a coating of ores or wallrock or as immiscible droplets in fluid
inclusions (e.g. Barton, 1967). Davis and Kirkland (1970) have postulated that the
native sulphur in the laminated anhydrite-calcite rocks of the Castile Formation is
the product of a reaction between hydrocarbons and anhydrite, the initial phase of
which can be represented by:

CaSO, +(C+4H) > H2S +CaCO3+H20

A similar reaction is proposed by Schnellmann (1959) to explain the Ras Gemsa
sulphur deposit in Egypt. At low temperatures it is possible for methane and SO, to
coexist metastably in a brine, or to react only sluggishly but above 90 °C a more
rapid a reaction takes place.

It is very likely that both mechanisms operated, but that the latter became the
more effective of the two as temperatures and pressures rose with increasing depth
of burial.

PROPOSED GEOLOGICAL MODEL

In recent years there have been numerous papers describing the possible role
of intrastratal brines, particularly those derived from carbonaceous oil shales in
evaporite basins, as a medium for the collection and transport of metals during
diagenetic compaction of a basinal sedimentary pile. This discussion was initiated
by the conflict between Davidson and Dunham over the association of evaporites
with mineralization. Davidson (1966) pointed out the spatial relationships between
ore deposits and basin margin sabkha facies. Bush (1970) and Llewellyn and
Stabbins (1968) have recently written on the same subject. A common theme has
been the existence of potentially hydrocarbon bearing shales in the basin centre
and the presence of sabkha type facies and reef complexes on the basin periphery.
Reef complexes, back reef evaporites and supratidal mudflats containing nodular
anhydrite all appear potential locations of ore deposition. Dozy (1970) quotes
several examples of producing oil fields with base metal mineralization at the basin
margins including those around the Kankakee Arch and the Ozark Uplift in the
Mississippi valley. The Pine Point Pb-Zn mineralization in Canada occurs on the
flanks of the Elk Point Evaporite Basin known to contain hydrocarbons (e.g. in the
Keg River Reefs).

Returning to the Zambian Copperbelt once again we see an analogous situa-
tion for the central portion of the Chambishi Basin contains carbonaceous shale
which is pyritic but generally lacking in copper sulphides. This passes up-dip into
a typical sabkha facies in which nodular anhydrite, or carbonate after anhydrite,
occurs and in which there are several recorded biohermal structures (see fig. 1).

===== page 16
 

250 A. E. ANNELS

All known ore deposits of ore-shale type are within this littoral zone. It is thus
suggested that the geological situation on the Copperbelt bears some resemblance
to that existing in present day oilfield basins. The carbonaceous argillite of the
Chambishi and Konkola basins could thus be considered as equivalent to the oil-
shale and the rather problematical carbonaceous arenites or “graywackes” of
Mufulira the oil-sands of this postulated Pre-Cambrian oilfield. Hydrocarbons
may have migrated with the metal enriched chloride brines towards the basin edge
where they reacted with anhydrite, or escaped into the arenites on the opposite side
of the Kafue anticline. This hypothesis would account for the occurrence of gra-
phitic carbon in relatively coarse arenites at Mufulira. It should also be noted that
each carbonaceous arenite body here is overlain by what would have been fairly
impermeable “cap rocks” e.g. the dolomitic “Mudseam” plus the “Banded Shales
and Quartzites” over the C horizon, the “Lower Dolomite” plus “Massive Shale”
over the B horizon and the “Lower Argillaceous Quartzite” containing silty argil-
lites, over the A horizon. A summary of the Mufulira stratigraphy is tabulated
below.

Simplified Stratigraphy of the Mufulira ore-bearing Formations

Formation Facies equivalent

Lower argillaceous quartzite

 

 

A Quartzite A Graywacke Ore zone
Inter A/B quartzite

Banded shales and quartzites
Massive shale

Lower dolomite

 

 

 

 

B Quartzite B Graywacke Ore zone
Inter B/C quartzite Algal dolomite
Banded shale and quartzite (stromatolite horizon)

Banded shale and dolomite
Mudseam (dolomitic siltstone)

 

C Quartzite C Graywacke Ore zone
FW Quartzite FW Grit |

_t

 

 

 

 

 

 

Basement granite and schist

 

We can thus summarize the events which are envisaged to have led to the
formation of the stratiform orebodies of the Zambian Copperbelt in the following
way:

(1) Metals brought into the depositional basins either by rivers or by metal
enriched hot brines emanating from springs along the possibly fault controlled
basin edge, were dispersed throughout the accumulating sediment. Such metals may
have been adsorbed onto particles of clay or organic material or may have occurred
as hydroxides, carbonates or other complexes.

===== page 17
STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 251

(2) The basin became restricted from the open sea and the waters became
increasingly saline. A marked brine density layering developed in the centre as
described by Schmalz (1969). Sabkha type mudflats appeared along the littoral zone
in which reef masses were inundated with muddy sediments.

(3) Nodular anhydrite was formed in both the basin centre and peripheral
sedimentary facies by supersaturation of interstitial waters.

(4) Bacterial action in the carbonaceous argillites at the basin centre quickly
converted the small nodules of anhydrite (or gypsum) to carbonate and allowed
the formation of abundant early diagenetic pyrite. Similar replacement may also
have begun in the littoral facies. The potash rich nature of the interstitial fluids
allowed the formation of abundant sericite and/or secondary microcline.

(5) As diagenesis proceeded and compactional effects became more pronounced,
intrastratal brines, plus hydrocarbons generated by the decay of the organic
material, began to move towards the basin margins. Under elevated temperatures
these brines desorbed metal ions, and carried them into the littoral zone where
anhydrite was abundant as a cement or as nodules.

(6) Reaction between the hydrocarbons in the brines and the anhydrite resulted
in the rapid precipitation of sulphides. Initially iron sulphides dominated, but with
advancing diagenesis copper, hitherto strongly bonded to organic material, was
desorbed in increasing amounts and carried into the sabkha facies by the brines and
then precipitated in the form of chalcopyrite or bornite. The gradual depletion of
potash in the brine by the formation of potassium silicates produced a relative
increase in soda concentrations and the appearance of secondary albite along with
the copper sulphides.

(7) The magnesium rich nature of the brines is indicated by the dominance
of dolomite in the lenticles and by the dolomitization of the bioherms. Chlorites
intergrown with the sulphides are magnesium rich varieties such as clinochlore and
sheridanite.

Thus, during diagenesis we have a reconcentration of metals towards the shore-
line from which they were originally dispersed during sedimentation. The rate of
supply of sulphur (or H2S) from the anhydrite was sufficient to balance the rate
of influx of metals though at times competition for sulphur was great enough for
pyrrhotite to form instead of pyrite, especially in those areas where the lenticle
concentration was lowest, i.e. to the northwest of the Nkana North Limb bioherm.
The small quantity of mineralization in the bioherm is explained by the fact that
its porosity was restricted by compaction and cementation, by the lack of a pre-
cipitant there, or by the fact that all the metals had been precipitated from the
brines before the brines entered this dolomite mass. In the latter case the reef
masses are envisaged as having acted as a plumbing system for the basin allowing
the upward and outward escape of the brines.

THE COBALT PROBLEM

It is not intended to deal with this subject in detail. Some of the problems
which face the proponents of the syngenetic synsedimentary origin for both the
copper and cobalt mineralization should, however, be pointed out.

===== page 18
252 A. E. ANNELS

If the metals are derived from weathering of the Basement Complex and then
deposited in the various basins flanking land masses, then:

(1) Why is cobalt only found on the southwest side of the Kafue Anticline (see
map, fig. 1)? On the Luanshya-Mufulira-Ndola side cobalt is only at background
levels.

(2) Why are all known occurrences of cobaltiferous pyrite and cupriferous lin-
naeite and carrollite found along a narrow belt which passes through Baluba,
Nkana, Chibuluma, Nkana North Limb, Mwambashi and Bancroft?

Is it fortuitous that virtually all the sills (extrusions?) of amphibolite in the
Upper Roan are found on the southwest side of the Kafue anticline and that their
thickest development coincides with the central portion of this cobalt lineation?

Why is it that analyses of pyrites extracted from late stage veinlets in the Upper
Roan amphibolites show an enrichment in cobalt only when the Lower Roan
orebody beneath contains cobalt? Up to 2.5 % cobalt has been recorded in these
pyrites.

Why is it that all analyses of Basement mineralization and Basement rocks
known to the author fail to reveal the presence of cobalt?

The majority of occurrences of cobalt throughout the world are associated with
basic magma, why should Zambia (and for that matter, Zaire) be an exception
to the rule? Perhaps both the amphibolites and the cobalt mineralization are related
to the same magma body at depth.

SULPHIDE ZONATION

The picture of sulphide zones parallel to shorelines as presented by Garlick
(1961), Davis (1954) and others, is in the author’s opinion an over simplification.
In reality such clearly defined zones are extremely difficult to recognize. Vertical
and lateral sulphide zonation is often explained in terms of transgressions and
regressions of the shore line which are incompatible with changes in water depth
as indicated by sedimentological evidence. At Nkana North Limb a gradual
deepening of the ore-shale basin was accompanied by the deposition of carbon-
aceous argillites. This event was then followed by a gradual shallowing so that the
sediments became increasingly silty and sandy and eventually gave way to coarse
grained quartzites. These lithological changes coincide with a change from Cp + Py
at the base of the ore-shale to Cp +Bn to Py+Cp and then to Py close to the top.
Syngenetic theories (Garlick, 1961) indicate that a shallowing of the water should
not be accompanied by a change to pyrite, or deepening by a change to bornite.
A similar reversed profile is found at Baluba, Chambishi and Muliashi South. The
opposite zonation, in which the changes are Py > Cp — Bn > Cc in an upward
direction, is found at Roan and Roan Extension. It should be borne in mind that
both the Roan and Chambishi Basins (see fig. 1) were probably part of one large
depositional basin and should show the same sedimentary trends, which they do.
We should thus find, after taking into account diachronous contacts, identical pic-
tures in the mineral zoning which should correspond to lithological zones. This is
not the case.

===== page 19
 

STRATIFORM ORE DEPOSITS OF THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT 253

STRUCTURAL CONTROLS

Brock (1962) first postulated the theory that sections of the crust may have
collapsed in the Katangan geosyncline thus accounting for the distribution of the
present sedimentary basins. While his conclusions should be treated with reserve,
there is certainly some evidence which tends to support his ideas.

Firstly, it is remarkable that pinchouts of the ore-shale in the Chambishi Basin
tend to coincide with the present margins of this structural basin. The extremely
sudden pinchout of the carbonaceous shale to the southwest between Mwambashi
North and Chibuluma (fig. 1) is, in the author’s opinion, too rapid to be explained
in terms of facies changes. What is more remarkable is that this line also marks the
sudden disappearance of the upper portion of the Lower Roan above the ore-
shale and possibly even the basal Upper Roan. At the same time the Upper Roan
amphibolite “sills” lie almost directly on arenites which are believed to represent
the Footwall Quartzites. In the area where the ore-shale is present, all the amphi-
bolites are separated from the Footwall Formations by more than a 100 m of
arenites, argillites and dolomites. Though it is realized that such “sills” could be
transgressive, the above facts appear to the author to be too much of a coincidence.
They could, however, be explained by block subsidence during the deposition of the
Lower Roan.

Secondly, large sections of the margin of the Chambishi Basin are followed by
monoclinal fold limbs some of which are subvertical or even overturned. A major
monocline strikes eastwards from Pitanda, in the northwest of the Basin, passing
immediately to the south of the Chambishi Open Pit, while a second runs approxi-
mately north-south to the east of Nkana North Limb and links up with another in
the Nkana syncline. The base of this fold is followed by a thick sedimentary trough.

If block faulting did take place during sedimentation of the Lower Roan, then
this may have allowed the influx of metal enriched, possibly magmatically derived,
solutions into the basin from a series of springs around the margins.

CONCLUSIONS

In recent years many geologists have accepted that the syngenetic deposition of
sulphides in the Copperbelt is a proven fact and have based their studies on this
assumption. The main aim of this paper is to point out that such a theory by no
means explains all the facts, and indeed has certain serious limitations. While it is
attractive in many ways, it is still difficult to accept that sulphides could be pre-
cipitated from waters beneath which, coarse, often cross bedded, arenites were
being deposited and in which cryptozoon stromatolites were able to establish
themselves. Similarly, bicherms, oncolitic stromatolites, and possibly also collenoid
stromatolites, are also found in the ore-shale surrounded by mineralized sediment.

The theory that at least some of the sulphide mineralization in the Copperbelt
was formed by the combined bacterial and inorganic reduction of anhydrite in the
diagenetic environment is presented for critical examination by those familiar with
such deposits.

===== page 20
254 A. E. ANNELS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work on which this paper is based was undertaken while the author was
employed in Zambia with the Chibuluma and Mufulira Divisions of Roan Con-
solidated Mines Limited, and the assistance rendered to the author by his col-
leagues there is gratefully acknowledged. The ideas expressed in this paper were
generated during discussions with Mr. W. G. Garlick, the Consulting Geologist,
now retired. The author is very much indebted to this inspired geologist for whom
he holds great admiration. Apologies are thus rendered to him for what appears
to be an attack on his long-held ideas.

References

ANNELS, A. E. (1972). — Palaeogeography and sedimentology of the Ore-Shale Formation.
Nkana North Limb Research Project, Rept. No. 2, Unpublished R.C.M. Chibuluma
Division Report.

ANNELS, A. E. (1973). — The genetic significance of anhydrite-sulphide relationships in the
copper-bearing arenites at Mufulira Mine, Zambia. Unpublished R.C.M. Mufulira
Division Report.

Barton, P. B. (1967). — Possible role of organic matter in the precipitation of the Mississippi
Valley ores. Econ. Geol., Monograph 3, p. 371-378.

Brock, B. B. (1962). — On the structure and sedimentation of the Katanga basin. In: Strati-
form Copper Deposits in Africa. Edited by J. Lombard and P. Nicolini, Assoc. African
Geol. Sury., Paris, Part 2, p. 116-142.

Bus, P. R. (1970). — Chloride-rich brines from sabkha sediments and their possible role in
ore formation. Trans. B, Instn. Min. Metall., Vol. 79, p. 137-144.

Darntey, A. G. (1960). — Petrology of some Rhodesian Copperbelt orebodies and associated
rocks. Trans. Instn. Min. Metall., Vol. 69, p. 137-172; 371-398; 540-569.

Davinson, C. F. (1966). — Some genetic relationships between ore deposits and evaporites.
Discussions and contributions. Instn. Min. Metall., Trans. B, Vol. 75, p. 300-304.

Davis, G. R. (1954). — The origin of the Roan Antelope Copper deposit of northern Rho-
desia. Econ. Geol., Vol. 49, p. 575-615.

Davis, J. B. and KirkLanp, D. W. (1970). — Native sulphur deposition in the Castile
Formation, Culberson County, Texas. Econ. Geol., Vol. 65, No. 2, p. 107-121.

Dozy, J. J. (1970). — A geological model for the genesis of the lead-zinc ores of the
Mississippi Valley, U.S.A. Trans. Instn. Min. Merall., Vol. 79, p. 163-170.

Garuick, W. G. (1961). — The Geology of the Northern Rhodesia Copperbelt. Edited by
F. Mendelsohn, Publ. Macdonald, London, p. 146-162.

GarLick, W. G. (1964). — Criteria for recognition of syngenetic sedimentary deposits and
veins formed by their remobilization, Vol. 6. Proc. Aust. Instn. of Min. and Metall.
(General).

GarLick, W. G. (1967). — Special features and sedimentary facies of stratiform sulphide
deposits in arenites. Proc. 15th Inter-Univ. Geol. Congr. Univ. of Leicester, p. 107-164.
Garlick, W. G. and FLEISCHER, V. D. (1972). — Sedimentary environment of Zambian copper

deposition. Zambia issue, Geologie en Mijnbouw, No. 3, p. 277-298.

LLEWELLYN, P. G. and Stapsins, R. (1968). — Lower Carboniferous evaporites and mineral-
ization in the eastern and central Midlands of Britain. Trans. B, Instn. Min. Metall.,
Vol. 77, p. 170-173.

Scumaiz, R. F. (1969). — Deep-water evaporite deposition: a genetic model. Am. Assoc.
Petrol. Geol. Bull., Vol. 53, No. 4, p. 798-823. .
SCHNELLMANN, G. A. (1959). — Formation of sulphur by reduction of anhydrite at Ras

Gemsa, Egypt. Econ. Geol., Vol. 54, p. 889-894.

