                                            Rept.Bk.No. 32/30




                 DEPARTMENT OF MINES
                   SOUTH AUSTRALIA




MAGNETIC OBSERVATIONS IN THE MIDDLEBACK RANGES, 1951




              GEOPHYSICAL REPORT     k/51
               D.M. 1299/50, 62/50.




                        by


       D. McPHARLIN - ASSISTANT GEOPHYSICIST.
     Further to the observations carried out by the writer in this
area, observations have been made along a number of t raverses
suggested by the party carrying geological mapping in this area,
under the supervision of Dr. K.R. Miles.

     These reconnaissance traverses were at widely spaced intervals,
the relative positions of which were fixed, as in the previous
surveym by the use of aerial photographs/
Results.
     The readings taken on these traverses have been plotted, as
before, on the preliminary geological maps of the area.
     Along the traverses to the west of the main Camel Hill line,
where it has been proposed that diamond drilling should be carried
out to determine possible extensions of the banded iron formation,
there are no magnetic anomalies of comparable magnitude to those
over the known, formation.
     Therefore, if the steeply dipping beds of the Camel Hill line
do return to the surface in this area, it is at a very low angle
of dip.
     It is thought probable that the trough of low readings exten-
ding in a north west direction from the northern end of the gap in
the range may be associated with the end of these beds, which would
thus appear to have been out off at considerable depth, except on
the most northern of this set oftraverses, where an anomaly of 1000
gammas would appear to be associated with a remnant of the formatior
     In the area to the noeth of Iron Knob township the traverses
to date indicate that the iron formation extends about one mile
north of the township where there is still a marked anomaly, but
that beyond this point the large anomaly disappears, probably due
to the formation putching downwards towards the north.
     The only other traverses on which anomalies of the order found
over the magnetite bearing iron formation were observed were on the
one between the north end of the Iron Duchess and the south end of
the Iron Knight, and the most southerly traverse through the gap in
the Camel Range line to the west of Mt. Middleback North •
                         -   2   -




N. B.     It should be remembered that the large magnetic anomalues
are due to the magnetic content of the beds, and that should    the
magnetite    be sufficiently oxidised there may be no such anomaly
e.g. in the taconite beds in the lake Superior district the less
magnetic    parts generally correspond to the enriched ore zones.
        Further work to the north of Iron Knob may be useful to follow
the trend of the iron formation, but it is considered that as an
aerial magnetic reconnaissance is to be carried out in the near
future, this survey become available as the work can then be better
directed.




                                         D. McPharlin.
