                                                      Rept.Bk. No.   32/29
      1*

- 4




                           DEPARTMENT OF MINES

                             SOUTH AUSTRALIA




           MAGNETIC OBSERVATIONS IN THE MIDDLEBACK RANGES, 1950




                            GEOPHYSICAL REPORT 1/51

                              D.M. 1199/50, 62/50




                                  by



                D. McPHARLIN - ASSISTANT GEOPHYSICIST,
                   .   SUMMARY,


     Magnetic observations have been used to trace the continuity

of hematite-quartzite "beds under shallow sand or alluvial cover in

the vicinity of the Middleback Ranges.   In some cases continuity of

the beds occurs under the alluvial cover in other cases the beds

appear to be discontinuois.

                   INTRODUCTION.

     It was demonstrated by C. Kerr Grant (Mining Review No. 90),

that the steeply dipping hematite quartzite beds in this area,

produced anomalues in the vertical component of the magnetic inten-

sity of the order of several thousand gammas.

     In this survey an attempt has been fnade to utilise the above

property to demonstrate the subsurface continuity, or otherwise,

of the iron quartzite beds, where no surface outcrops can be found.

                       METHOD.

    As no general survey of this area, which is mainly of a slight
undulating nature, covered by mallee etc, was available, traverses

were established from points whose relative positions were fixed by

the use of aerial photographs.

     Readings were taken with a Hilger and Watts vertical force

vatiometer, having a scale factor of approximately 30 gammas per

division.

                       RESULTS.

     The results are shown in the form of traverses plotted on the
preliminary regional geological map prepared by Dr. K. R. Miles.
     Over the hematite quartzite formations anomalies of up to
8,000 gammas were recorded.
     Over the beds of the Camel Range and its extensions, where the
iron content is largely in the form.of magnetite or magnetic hema-
tite, high readings were obtained, due mainly, as is indicated by
the width of the anomalies, to the unoxidised nsgnetite at a depth
two to three hundred feet below the surface.

     This type of formation may be traced by this method, and it is
expected that the traverses taken through areas where no geological
outcrops have been found will prove a useful addition to the geo-

logical information.

        As may be seen from the plotted traverses, some of these

areas of no outcrop are due to erosion of the beds until no expo-

sures have been left, although the magnetic anomaly is still in

evidence.

        In some areas there is no magnetic anomaly, where from the

exposed geological evidence it could be reasonably assumed that the

beds should be continuous under the surface cover.

        It is anticipated that further comment on this situation will

be provided by Dr. Miles in his reports, to be published on comple-

tion of his work in this area.

        Over the Ash Range, where the beds consist of a limonite chert,

the magnetic properties of which are not far different from the

surrounding rocks, little or no change is apparent in the magnetic

values, and the method appears to be of no value in tracing this

type of formation.

        South of the Middleback Range along the main Port Lincoln

Highway, there were a number of anomalous readings, the ones of

greater magnitude appearing to be associated with the contacts bet-

ween various rock types, e»g. the most pronounced anomaly is in the

area where there is a transition from the conglomerates etc. of the

Moonabee Range formation to the porphyry and granite area further

west.

        This anomaly appears to persist in the readings taken along the

most southerly traverse to date, where much of the country is

covered by sand dunes etc. and may be of use in tracing the contact

area in this type of country.

        Immediately aoath of the-Middleback Range, there- is a region in

which the value of the certical magnetic intensity is low indicating

that the hematite quartzite formation of the Main Middleback Range

does not cross the road, but ends north of dt.



Plan Reference -                       •
           *                               (D. McPharlin)

   & / 2 6    Y   HISSLRICJR         ASSISTANT GEOPHYSICIST

   Ll
        *8/27 J
