                                               RS

                                       € OHF IDENT-iAtr.




        DEPARTMENT        OF   MINES

          SOUTH   AUSTRALIA*




THE IRON ORE RESOURCES OP THE MIDDLEBACK RANGE
              SOUTH AUSTRALIA.      •


               A SUMMARY



                     By



               KEITH R. MILES.




            SENIOR GEOLOGIST
                             CONTENTS



           Introduction

           Physiography

           Geology
                          Stratigraphy
                          Middleback Group
                          Geological Structure —
                                            Folding
                                            Faulting


           The Iron Ore Deposits
                          Description -
                                              Iron Knob
                                              Iron Monarch
                                              Iron Prince
                                              Iron Baron
                                              Iron Duke
                                              Other Orebodies.

           Ore Genesis

           Ore Reserves
                          Reserve Estimates
                        ' Grade

           Future Development

           Conclusions

           References
                                Text Figures
           Fig, 1. Geological and Locality Plan - Middleback Range Area.
fi-H^           2« Longitudinal Sections — Middleback Range.
^a-^ 2 -        3. Geological Cross Sections - Camel Hill and Middleback
                     Range.
5 3 . L o n g i t u d i n a l Cross sections Iron Monarch.
              5• Geological Cross Sections through Tunnel Mo. lA.
                   Iron Prince.
GJ-^ZMO       6. Diagrams illustrating Theory of Ore Genesis.
               DEPARTMENT     OF    MINES
                 SOUTH    AUSTRALIA.

    THE IRON ORE RESOURCES OF THE MIDDLEBACK RANGE,
          SOUTH AUSTRALIA       -    A SUMMARY.


                     INTRODUCTION

               The Middleback Range lies approximately 26 miles
west of the shipping port of Whyalla on Spencer Gulf, South
Australia and forms a broken line of prominent ridges standing
above a low plain.        The hills- are distributed meridionally
and extend discontinuously with broad, erosion gaps from Iron
Knob in the north to Iron Duke in the south, a total distance
of nearly kO miles.        They are composed primarily of iron rich
rocks in which occur local concentrations of high grade iron
ore.
               At the present time one of these deposits, the
Iron Monarch, the only iron deposit being worked in South
Australia, supplies over '95% of the iron ore being utilised
for iron and steel production. i:fi Australia.      Present pre
production from this deposit is of the order of 2,500,000 long
tons per annum.       .
               All known high grade iron ore deposits in the Middle-
back Range are controlled by the one company, the Broken Hill
Proprietary Company Limited, which operates a blast furnace
for production of pig iron at Whyalla, South Australia, and
through its subsidiary companies controls most of the Australian
iron and steel production,', at Newcastle and Port Kembla in New
South Wales.     The Middleback Range iron ore deposits were first
used solely as a flux in copper, and later lead smelting.           They
were taken over by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company in 1897.
Up to the end of the last century .it is estimated that about
100,000 tons of iron ore was mined for flux.        From then on
to the end of 191U approximately 750,000 tons of iron ore was
used for flux in lead smelting operations at Port Pirie, South
Australia. ; Since the beginning of 1915, when the first steel
                     -2 -

works was established at Newcastle, New South Wales, about
45>250,000 tons of iron ore has been produced from four
deposits in the Middleback Range, viz., Iron Monarch, Iron
Knob, Iron Prince and Iron Baron.       At the present time,ore
quarried at the Iron Monarch is carried to Whyalla in rail
trucks and thence loaded into ships for transport interstate
to Newcastle and Port Kembla. • .
                 During the period September 1948, to December 1951
a departmental geological survey.of about 2160 square miles'
of country in the Middleback Range area was carried out by the
writer and his assistants.        This included regional mapping
on air photo scale of 35 chains to an inch of the whole area,
detailed structural mapping of the entire Middleback Range
on air photo scale of 900 feet to an inch and detailed plane
table topographic surveys of all the scattered mining leases
("covering about 3,800 acres) on either 100 or 200 feet to an
inch.      Object of. the survey was to determine the distribution
of the iron ore deposits in relation to the geology, hence if
possible to decide.on the probable method of formation of the
orebodies so that' estimations of the ore reserves in known depo
sits could be made, and' the further search for new ore bodies
planned.        The following is a brief summary of the results of
this survey..

            .            PHYSIOGRAPHY
                 The Middleback Range area is one of generally
mature, subdued topography'and senescent drainage.       The
general plain level rises by a series of small and geologically
youthful fault scarps to a height of about 400 - 450 feet
above sea level at about 5 - 8 miles inland from the coast,
and thence stands at about 450 - 650 feet for many miles to the
westward. . The Middleback. Range comprises three major groups,
of ridges, the most northerly being the Iron Knob - Katunga
Hills' group and the others the North and South Middlebacks,
separated byKimba Gap.        Between the Iron Knob - Katunga Hills
arid the North Middlebacks, a distance of about 14 miles, is a
                    .- 3 -
connecting line of low narrow ridge's which arch to the westward
 and finally die out south of Camel Hill, about 1-1/2 miles
west of Iron Baron in the North Middlebacks.         This is known
 as the Camel Hill Line.
                The,highest points on the Middleback Range stand
 at 11+50 - 1U80 feet above sea level.       Average height of the
 ridges is 1000 - 1100 feet and 350 - 550 feet above general
plain level.       The hills are usually bare and stony and flanked
by rubble talus slopesi         The plains are soil and rubble covered,
 and sparsely timbered, usually carrying a fair growth of low
 scrub, salt, bush and blue bush and are used mostly for sheep
 grazing.     Rock.outcrops are scattered and rare.
 The climate is semi arid, average annual rainfall is 1-1/2 to
 9-1/2 inches and annual evaporation.80 - 90 inches.

                          GEOLOGY
 Stratigraphy
                 Several ages of geological formations or groups
 of formations have been distinguished as a result of the present
 survey of the .Middleback Range area viz., Quaternary - Recent,
 Tertiary, ? Cambrian, Proterozoic and Archaean.        The purposes
 of the present summary report will probably best be served by
 indicating the. detailed stratigraphical sequence in the.
 following tabulated form, together with a few additional
 explanatory notes..       Prom then on the discussion of geological
 details will be confined to the economically important iron
 bearing rocks.
Table I      Stratigraphic Sequence - Middleback Range Area
 Quaternary - Recent - Sand, soil, alluvium, dunes, travertine
 Tertiary                 - Laterite gravel, siliceous cement, grit
                             and sandstone, marins limestone (Pliocene)
                         Unconformity
                         Lincoln Gap Flagstones - Flaggy, shaly sand-
             Corunna ?       stones and interbedded shales.
?Cambrian-    Group -(       ^
                         Treg^Lana Shales - Laminated sandy and flaggy
                            shales.
Table I Cont'd          Unconformity Cont'd
           Corunna ( Corunna Conglomerate - Conglomerate grit
? Cambrian- Group ^
                       sandstone with some interbedded thin
                             sandy shales.
                      Unconformity
Proterozoic - Adelaide - Moonabie Grit.        Dense felthspathic
               System
                                 grit, coarse and fine sandstone
                                 quartzite.
                 Assumed unconformity
                         ( Upper Middleback Quartzite - Banded iron
                               formation and interbedded schists.
                             Cooks Gap Schist - Foliated grits and
              Middleback (    pebble schists phyllite with cherty
           ^     Group . (     and dolomite bands
Archaean \               lLower Middleback Quartzite - Banded iron
or middle^               ^   formations and interbedded schists.
Pre Camb-
 rian     1
                        (Middleback Worth Dolomite - Cherty dolo-
                               mite marble.
          ^Gneiss Complex - Sedimentary schists, quartzite,
                                 phyllite, migmatite, lit par lit
                                 gneiss, granitic gneiss and gneissic
                                 granite.
Intrusive Igneous Rocks'.
        Quartz veins and reefs.
        Younger Dolerite dykes.
        Borphyritic Granite - Charleston Granite.
        Gawler Range and Moonabie porphyries.
        Gneissic Granites and tor granites of the Gneiss Complex.
        Older Dolerite - dolerite gabbro amphibolite -      sills
                dykes and plugs.
                The oldest rocks in the area apparently comprise
a considerable sequence of conformable marine and shallow water
sediments presumably laid down around the shores of a primeval
land surface.      These rocks were later subjected to extensive
volcanic activity and penetrated by basic rocks ( the Older
Dolerites) and then thrown into a series of tight anticlinal
and synclinal folds before being uplifted and eroded.      Towards
the close of this period of folding the formations were frac-
tured and penetrated by rising acid solutions and gaspes and
granitic fluids which gradually replaced mueti of the sedimentary
material from below, converting it to netamorphic schists*
migmatites and lit par lit injection gneisses which have been
grouped under the general name of Gneiss Complex.      The over-
lying and unreplaced remnants of the originally extensive
sedimentary series are known as the Middleback Group.      It is
the Middleback Group of rocks which constitite the iron bearing
Middleback Range and Camel Hill line of ridges.
           Apparently younger rocks believed to belong to
the Adelaide System occur some distance to the east of the
Middleback Range.     These are steep dipping coarse grits and
sandstones belonging to the Moonabie Grit formation which in
turn is overlain with strong unconformity by gently tilted
coarse to medium fine sediments of the Corunna Group, of probable
basal Cambrian age.     Pebbles in the Corunna conglomerate
include sandstone - quartzite and grits of the Moonabie Grit
and banded iron formation and iron ore of the Mifldleback Group.
           The Moonabie and Gawler Range Porphyries are
intrusive into the basal members of the Corunna G:roup, and the
Charleston Granite is an even younger coarse, porphyritic granite
boss.    The Younger Dolerite is believed to be younger than all
of the previously mentioned rocks.
            Tertiary lateritic and siliceous gravels mark the
remnants of a very extensive peneplain, the product of long
continued erosion, and marine limestone marks-:     tJhe position
of a Pliocene marine incursion to the east of the Middleback
Range.   Quaternary - Recent soil and alluvium from senescent
drainage lines mantle most of the land surface to the east,
north-east and north-west of Range while to south-east, south,
south-west and immediate west of the Range the country is
covered with long sand dunes trending northwest - southeast.
                         - 6 -
Middleback Group.
           This group of formations contains all of the
iron rich rocks of economic interest in the presentsurvey.
The lowest recognizable horizon, showing any degree of areal
continuity in distribution is a bed of medium-grained dolomitic
marble whose original deposition under reasonably deep water
conditions apparently ushered in the period of deposition of
the most important rocks* the banded iron formations.     Two
horizons of these banded iron formations* the Upper and Lower
Middleback Quartzites* have been recognised in the South Middle-
backs* in parts of the Camel Hill Line and the Katunga Hills
(see Fig. l).   These two horizons are separated by a zone of
original pebbly beds* grits and aluminous sediments now
metamorphosed to foliated pebble schists and phyllitic schists
(Cooks Gap Schists) having a thickness of up to 1200 feet.
           The banded iron formations consist essentially of
alternating thin silica-rich bands or strata in the form of
dense chert, sometimes recrystallised to fine grained quartzite,
and iron-rich layers.in the form of predominating magnetite
hematite* or martite.    They are lithologically identleal with
the Pre-Cambrian banded iron formations of many other countries
- the "taconites" and 'Jjaspilites" of the Lake Superior region*
the "itabirites" of Brazil* the "calico rocks" of South Africa,
and the banded hematite quartzites of India, Sweden, Korea*
Manchuria* North China, the Ukraine and the "jasper bars"
of Western Australia.
           In the Middleback Range the upper and lower horizons
of banded iron formations, though thickened by plastic flow in
folding are believed to have maximum thicknesses of up to about
1000 feet and 7°0 feet respectively.     Due to folding and
subsequent erosion the upper bed has been completely removed in
the North Middlebacks.   Both beds contain numerous inter layered": -
thin shaly beds now metamorphosed to ferruginous chloritic or
phyllitic schists.   These banded iron formations are believed to
be special forms of chemical sediments
in which the iron and silica were transported as colloids and
precipitated* under conditions of cyclical deposition influenced
by a monsoonal type of climate, into closed marine basins or
shallow lakes.      The iron content varies from less than one
percent up to fifty percent.     Some of the bands are strongly
magnetic and polarised.     Many portions of the beds average
about     Ee. and        Si02 and can be considered low grade sili-
ceous iron ores (see below).      Weathering of these rocks results
in leaching of the iron in the form of linstoni te, leaving a
siliceous gossan.
Geological Structure
             Folding   - The rocks of the Middleback Range have
been thrown into a great number of synclinal and anticlinal folds
         ?



whose axes trend slightly obliquely to the meridional direction
of the Range itself..     The major, fold axis in both the North
and South Middlebacks is synclinal witti a major anticlinal
axis passing down on the western side of the Range between it
and the Camel Hill line of ridges*.     The axes of these major
folds were themselves warped by later cross folding on a number
of east-west axes probably whilst the beds were still in a
slightly plastic state..
             The result of this cross warping was to produce un-
dulations in the pitch of the north-south *fold axes, and to throw
the formations into a number of alternating elongated dome and
basin structures.      Subsequent elevations and erosion of the
whole area have resulted in the removal of most of the domed
structures, leaving only the remnants of "keels" outlined by
sections of the hard, highly resistant hematite-quartzi te hori-
zons.   The Katunga Hills and North and South Middlebacks, are
such remnants of compound keel structures, whilst the Kimba Gap
and the area lying between the North Middlebacks and Katunga
Hills, and the area south of the South Middlebacks represent
regions which were once occupied by domes but being regions
of tension were easily penetrated by granitisrrgsolutions and
thus weakened hasesince been completely eroded away.
                        - 8 -
              It is believed that this pattern of major folding
together with its related minor fold structures had a very-
important influence on the formation and distribution of the high
grade iron ore. bodies of the Middleback Range. (Pigs. 1,2 and 3').
              There is no evidence of the original distribution of
•or of folding in the Middleback Group of rocks beyond Ash Range
to the east of.the Middleback Range.     ..It is possible that further
search in the areas west of the Camel Hill Line may yet reveal
evidence of the extension of folded structures of the formations
in this direction.      Such search, can best be carried out in the
first instance by aerial magnetometer surveys.

              Piaulting - Local faulting and shearing has been
responsible for displacement of outcrops of the rocks of the
Middleback Group in places but it is not considered that faulting
played a major part in the formation of.the Middleback Range as
it is today, nor is it considered that shearing and faulting is a
necessary precursor to the formation of the iron ore bodies.
These views are opposed to suggestions made by L.K. Ward (1949).

                     THE IRON ORE DEPOSITS
Description
              The principal high grade iron ore bodies of the area
are the Iron Monarch and Iron Knob,.Iron Prince, Iron Baron and
Iron Duke, and there has been some production from all but the last.
The Iron Knight, Iron Duchess, Iron Chieftain, Iron Queen, Iron
Warrior and Iron Count are other smaller ore bodies in the area.
Their distribution is indicated in the "plan (Eig. l).
Iron Knob - This deposit was the first to be developed and it
has been quarried for a length of 1,600 feet and has a maximum
width of 220 feet.     This ore body is long and narrow, strikes
north and south, and forms the core of a ridge.      It apparently
occupies the keel of a steep sided synclinal fold bounded by
banded iron formation and altered ferruginous chloritic schists,
and flanked to the east by granitic schists.      The ore is uniformly
high grade, usually fine grained massive hematite or martite.
It is typically low in manganese, phosphorus, silica and sulphur.
Average partial analysis indicate 68.3% Ee, 0.07% Mn, 0.03% P
and 0.05% S..

Iron Monarch - The Iron Monarch ore.body is the present principal
source of supply for the Australian iron and steel industry.
The ore body occupies what was originally one of the highest
hills in the region.     It is roughly circular in plan and has a
maximum north south length of about 2,100 feet and a maximum
east west dimension of 2,200 feet.      It has been developed by a
series of: benches for a vertical depth of approximately 350 feet
below the original hill crest.

           The ore body occurs in a broad open syncline modified
by a central anticlinal ridge whose axes all trend slightly
east of north and pitch gently to the north.      The structure is
now fairly well disclosed by a series of exposures on the various
 benches and roadway cutting as well as by some exploratory tun-
nelling and boring.     The ore is flanked on the north-east and
south by remnants of siliceous banded iron formations or
hematite cherts and clay schists, and in places shows banded
structures similar to that of the adjacent ferruginous cherts
which it has evidently replaced.      The transition zone is usually
fairly narrow.      The ore is cut by a series of three Younger
Dolerite dykes striking north-west - south-east, the largest and
most northerly of which forms the north wall of the ore in the
present quarries.      The general form of the Iron Monarch ore
body and its irregular pitching floor is indicated by the geo-
logical sections -(Fig. i+).
           The ore is high grade hematite with some residual
magnetite or martite.      It can be quarried to a grade of about
65% Ee. Manganiferous oris containing from 3% up to nearly l^/o Mn
originally formed a hard resistant core outcropping at the crest
of Iron Monarch hill but much of this has now been quarried away.
Clay-schist constitutes about 10% by weight of the ore body.
Normally silica, alumina and phosphorus content is very low, and
                    - 10 -
titanium and sulphur are negligible.   Average grade of high gradeorc
exposed in underground tunnels at Iron Monarch is about 6k% Fe and
0.58$ Mn.   In addition there is a zone of manganiferous ore aver-
aging 57% Fe and 8.6% Mn.

Iron Prince - This differs from the Iron Monarch in that the ore
occurs not in a single mass but as a series of lenticular bodies
intimately interfingered with the enclosing host rocks.      These
host rocks consist of banded iron formations and interbedded clay
schists and abundant intrusive sills and dykes of dolerite-
amphibolite all folded into a tight meridional synclinorium whose
keel pitches southerly at about 15°»           ore occupies parts of

the central trough of this synclinorium which is located in a
composite ridge standing at a maximum height of 1100 feet or
i+00 - 450 feet above the surrounding plain.     The keel of this
trough is about 200 feet above plain level at the northern end
of the Iron Prince but at the quarry in. the southern end is
probably more than 100 feet below plain level (See Pig. 5). •
            The ore has apparently been formed by replacement of
the banded iron formations and schists, residual banding in the
iron ore-being identical with banding in the adjacent host rocks.
The passage of replacing solutions has been controlled by the
pre-existing synclinal structures in the banded iron formations.
The ore is characteristically high grade, and low in manganese
and phosphorus.   Average composition of all ore so far produced
is 64.7$ Fe, 0.27% Mn and 0.028$ P..
Iron Baron - This is a large prominent hill reaching a maximum
height of 1250 feet above sea level.   Much of the hill crest is
covered with recemented linrionitic iron ore rubble or "float".
The hill carries a number of lenticular masses of dense banded
hematite, the most important of which lies chiefly on the western
slope of. the hill where it occupies the keel of a synclinal fold
in banded hematite quartzite and schist host rock.
            So far all production from the Iron Baron has come from
a small quarry at the northern end of the.hill, the principal
ore body not yet having been opened up. . Within this quarry
                     - 11 -
on the western wall of the ore body there is a rapid transition
from massive banded hematite ore to banded ferruginous chert or
banded iron formation.     Average grade of ore yet produced is
62% Fe, 0.22$ Mn andO.038% P.

Iron Duke - This ore body appears to be .Confined chiefly to
the flatter dipping western limb of a north pitching syncline
which is itself a large drag fold on the major synclinorium
forming the South Middlebacks.    The steeper, nearly vertical
eastern limb consists of normal siliceous banded iron formations
and the transition zone from high grade iron ore to banded ferru-
ginous quartzite is quite narrow.    Although this ore body has nott
yet been developed, from sampling it would appear to be similar
in grade and mineral content to the other high grade ore bodies
in the Range and should be capable of yielding ore containing
60-65% Pe, low in manganese and phosphorus.

Other Orebodies - Most of the other smaller bodies of iron ore
in the Middleback Range are similar to the larger ore deposits
already described, both in type, in composition and grade of
ore, and in structural relationships to host rocks.    With the
possible exception of the Iron Knight, the iron ore in all of
these smaller deposits appears to be located in pitching synclinal
drag folds of larger or smaller scale, within the banded iron
formations and associated argillaceous and ferruginous schists.
As far as can be ascertained from mapping surface features, the ore
lenses within the Iron Knight leases seem to occupy portions of'
a steadily dipping limb stricture rather than a fold trough.
           In general the banding, of the high grade hematite ores
is indicative of replacement of the banded hematite quartzite
host.   Corresponding replacement of the associated argillaceous
schists or of the amphibolites and amphibolite schists has nowhere
been so complete, these rocks usually tending to remain .within the
ore as "mullock" bodies.    It is noticeable that the high grade
iron ore deposits are confined to the banded iron formation horizons
of the Middleback group and where the two horizons can be distin-
guished it has been found that the ore bodies occur within the
                   - 12 -

strattgrapjiically lower formation.   No ore bodi®s have been

discovered within the uniformly dipping limb structures of the

Camel Hill line.

                      ORE   GENESIS


            Several conflicting theories as to the origin of the
high grade iron ore bodies, in the Middleback Range have been
advanced.   These arei-
(1) That they are lodes injected into the country rock from some
      external magmatic source.
(2) That, they have been formed by replacement of the country rock
      by iron introduced from some external source by the agency
      of ascending hydrothermal solutions.

(3) That they have been formed by replacement of the country rock
                                            (outcropping)
      by iron leached from adjacent overlying^portions of the
      same country rock and transported by descending supergene
      solutions.
            The first two theories, supported originally by R.L.Jack
(1922) and L.K. Ward (1949) respectively fail adequately to explain
much of the field evidence, particularly in regard to the common
relationship of high grade ore bodies to certain rock types and
rock structures and are thus considered invalid.
            Theory No. 3 is the classical theory of downward laaching
and migration under the action of meteoric waters which has been
supported by many competent authorities to explain the origin of
the major hematite ore bodies of the Lake Superior Region - such
as the high grade iron ores associated with the "taconites" of
the Mesabi;. Range.    This theory explains satisfactorily many of
the field facts regarding these ores - their apparent confinement
to the troughs of pitching synclines with in the banded iron
fiormations, the proved absence of any roots or subterranean "feeders"
entering the base of some of the ore bodies, the uniform chemical
and mineralogical composition of the ore, and the general absence
of sulphides and hydrothermal gangue minerals in the ore.
                    .   - 13 -

Features which are not satisfactorily explained by this theory
are (a) the absence of any marked vertical variation in the quality
or physical characters of the ore, (b) the absence of any ore bodies
in the Upper banded iron formation horizon in the South Middlebacks
where synclinal fold structures presumably suitable for ore concen-
tration can be found, (c) the fact that under present day weathering
conditions iron rather than silica is first leached, the iron
being transported and deposited as lirrtonite and the silica sub-
sequently being removed by mechanical erosion processes.
           A further hypothesis (No.^) is suggested by the writer
viz., that the high grade iron ores were formed by replacement
of the country rock by iron leached from adjacent portions of the
same country rock, and concentrated by the agency of laterally
moving hydrothermal solutions assisted by hydrothermally
mobilised supergene waters.      This theory depends on the view
that hydrothermal activity associated with the formation of the
Gneiss Complex by the granitic injection, metasomatism and
felspathisation of pre-existing sediments, took place after the
deposition of the MiddlebackGroup of sedimentary formations and
was responsible for their metamorphism and conversion, in places,
into granitic gneisses, migmatites and schists.       The granitisation
process is -conceived as having been initiated along the axes of
major anticlinal folds and gradually advanced laterally towards
the folded synclinal zones.      Leaching of the banded iron for ill-
ations produced quartzites, and later felspathisation converted
them to gneisses.   The leached iron advancing ahead of the front
of granitisation and transported by hydrothermal and heated
mobilized supergene waters* entered the remnant synclinal zones
of Middleback Group rocks which now form the Middleback Range, and
became concentrated within favourable structures to form the
existing ore bodies.    The stages of this process are illustrated
diagrammatically in Fig. 6.

           Final downward movement of these waters into pitching
synclinal troughs would account for the shape of many of the ore
                •   -lk -

bodies and the apparent lack of channelways entering them from
below.     This hypothesis would also explain the apparent concen-
tration of iron ore bodieis into the lower Middleback Quartzite
horizon which, within the major keel "structures tended to form a
protective casing surrounding the Upper horizon.       It would also
explain the high degree of oxidation of the ore bodies, and why
no repetition of the ore forming process has occurred in later
geological time.     The absence of sulphides is attributable to the
strongly oxidising conditions of ore formation and the absence
of normal hydrothermal gangue minerals to the highly dilute form
of the circulating waters due to the abundance of meteoric
solut-ions and to the extremely simple chemical composition of
the replaced host rocks.


                     ORB    RESERVES

Reserve Estimates
             The following tabulated statements of ore reserves
represent estimates based on the results of the recent field
surveys.     They have been subdivided into high grade iron ore
such as has been described occurring in various mineral leases
held by the Broken Hill Proprietary Coy. Ltd., and low grade
ore comprising the siliceous banded iron formations of the
Middleback Group encountered in the Middleback Range, the
Katunga Hills, and the Camel Hill line.      The estimates must be
considered only tentative, based on individual judgment regard-
ing the distribution of the ore in many places and will no doubt
be subject to considerable revision when the field of underground
exploration is extended.
             The calculated reserves of high grade ore have been
subdivided into "probable" ore and "possible" ore.       "Probable"
includes proved or "blocked out" ore together with the ore in
those portions of the ore bodies which from geological evidence
can be reasonably assumed to extend down at least to the limits
of economic quarrying.      "Possible" ore includes inferred or
hypothetical extensions of the "probable" ore boundaries,
                        - 15 -

deduced from geological reasoning but of which direct evidence
is inconclusive, together with those portions of ore bodies for
whose presence there is adequate field evidence but which may be
beyond the limits of economic quarrying.            Much "possible" ore
may probably be recovered by mining.

TABLE II     Reserves of High Grade Iron Ore - Middleback Range


 Ore Deposit        Probable (tons)    Possible (tons)     Total(tons)

 Iron Monarch        59,245*000             131*000        59*376,000

 Iron Knob           3,403*000              481,000         3*890,000
 iron Prince         16,362,000          6,396,000         22 *758*000
 iron Baron          19i*754 *000        3,020,000         22,774*000
 Iron puke           17*510,000         16,919*000         34*429*000
lion Duchess          4,340,000.         7,404,000          11*744*000
 Iron Knight          5,500,000         10,800,000          16,300,000
 iron Chieftain       1,200,000          l ,3 00', ooo e   . 2, 500:, 000
 iron Queen           1,279,000             635*000          1,914*000
 Iron Count             358,000 .                              358*000
 iron Warrior           340,000              -                 340,000
 South Iron Queen         47*000             -                  47*000

Totals     '        129*338,000         1+7*092*000        176,430,000


TABLE III Reserves of Low Grade Iron Ore — Middleback Range.


 Deposit                             Tons
Katunga Hills                        588,000*000
North Middleback Range           . 2,906,000,000
South. Middleback Range             1,879,000,000
Camel Hill line                       257,000,000

                      Total         5,430,000,000

Grade
               The general grade of the high grade iron ore bodies
of the Middleback Range has already been indicated.             The ores
vary little in composition in different parts of the range.
They are typically almost free of sulphur, titanium and
phosphorus, and seldom contain more than about 2$ of combined
silica and alumina.        Manganese is the principal variant
and may rise-from less than 0.5$ Mn to 15$ Mn.            There should
be little difficulty in maintaining an. ore grade of
combined iron and manganese from each of the high grade ore
bodies cited above.
                 The low grade iron ore bodies, the siliceous banded
iron formations, are probably more variable in proportions of
iron to silica, but the minor constituents are characteristically
extremely consistent.        These features are indicated in the
following assays of k_ representative samples from different parts
of the Middleback Range
TABLE IV Composition of Low Grade ^Iron Ores - Middlebact Range.


                             A              B         C           D

    H2o                       1.48          2.08      1.92       1.78
Si02                        51.24          51.78     53.01+     56.52
    Fe                      33*10          32.15     31.11      28.92

    Mn                        0.07 .         O.O7     0.08       0.07
    P                         0.05      ,/'-. 0.05    0.04       0.05

    s                         0.02           0.03     0.01       0.04
    Ti                     , Trace           0.003    0.003      0.003

A. Katunga Hills
B        Camel Hill

C        South Middlebacks - south side Kimba Gap
D        South Middlebacks - central range near Mt. Middleback.

                       FUTURE DEVELOPMENT

                 The future exploitation of the Middleback Range iron
ore bodies is inevitably bound up in the future of the
Australian steel industry.           At the present time the steel
making capacity of the country is well below the rate of steel
consumption and it is obvious that in a relatively undeveloped!
country with a steadily increasing population and a rapidly
expanding industrial capacity, such as Australia, a steadily
accelerating demand for steel can be anticipated.

              S.B. Dickinson,in a recent review of the Australian
steel industry^ (1952) has estimated that by i960 Australia's
steel requirements will be at least 5,000,000 tons annually.
This would require production of a minimum of 7*500,000 tons
of iron ore annually or about 3 times the present rate of
production.    Dickinson has further suggested that a desirable
expansion would be to an annual steel making capacity of 7,500,000
tons, requiring 11,250,000 tons of iron ore by i960.

              It can be anticipated that because of their purity
and accessibility the Middleback Range iron ore deposits will
continue to supply at least a half and more probably near
threequarters,of the Australian iron ore requirements for some
considerable time.    Assuming a threefold expansion of oire
production from the Middleback Range deposits during the next
decade, very considerable inroads would have been made into
the known reserves of high grade ore.     Indeed, without the
proving of further reserves, and assuming an expansion in ore
production of the above order, by 1970 the effective future life
of high grade ore in the Middleback Ranges could well have been
reduced to no more than 15 years.
              For continuation of steel production on the scale
predicted beyond that time, if raw material from the Middleback
Range area is to be utilised, it will be necessary to follow
the lead given in America^and other countries and develop the low
grade iron ores (banded irbn formations).    For this purpose
it will be essential to develop a satisfactory method of bene-
ficiation of these low grade ores to convert them to a suitable
grade and physical condition for feeding into the blast furnaces.
No doubt the advances at present being made int^the metallurgical
techniques of. iron ore beneficiation from the taconites of the
                    - 18 -

Lake Superior Region in North America will be closely watched
by interested parties in this country.
           Major problems are involved in the switch over from
high grade to low grade iron ore utilisation however.        For
the same rate of steel production the ore production capacity must
be increased threefold.      Irrespective of what ultimate bene-,
ficiation process is evolved, milling plants must be established
to treat the entire production of low grade ore and large
capacity plants capable of up grading and agglomerating the.
milled products must be installed.     This must entail an
enormous capital expenditure.     The total available reserves of
low grade banded iron formations in South Australia and else-
where (particularly 'Western Australia) are probably adequate
to supply Australia's requirements irrespective of expansion,
for many centuries to come, but the remoteness of many of these
deposits from industrial centres will mitigate against their
exploitation for a very long time.
           It is apparent, that the capital expenditure necessary
for the transfer to low grade iron ore utilisation, however long
delayed, must inevitably sharply raise the production cost of
Australian steel and steel products.      It would seem most
advisable to cushion this cost rise by a very gradual change-
over, spread over a very considerable number of years, so that
the continuous parallel production of cheap high grade ore would
for a long ti^e be available to. "sweeten" the market.
           For this reason the writer is convinced that an early
start should be made in planning for the establishment of the
necessary beneficiation treatment plants and for the active
mining development and exploitation of suitably located deposits
of banded iron formation in Australia.     He believes that within
10 - 15 years from now production and treatment of low grade iron
ores on a working scale should have been fully established in this
country, and should be making real contributions to the raw
materials for the steel industry.
           The. low grade ores of the Middleback Range, being so
                     19 -


close to the routes for the transport of high grade ore, can
be expected to receive early attention.      The banded hematite
quartzites from this region are in itany cases chemically and
mineralogically less complex than some of the taconites already
being successfully processed in the Lake Superior Region, and
should present n o t m ^ u e metallurgical problems in beneficiation.

                     CONCLUSIONS

         As a result of the recent detailed survey of the
geology and iron ore resources of the Middleback Range region
the writer has reached the following conclusions:-
1*       There are a limited number of very pure high grade
           iron ore bodies exposed in the Middleback Ranges.
          Most of these are reasonably accessible and capable
           of exploitation by surface quarrying methods.      All
          known deposits of economic significance were found
           prior to the present survey and are being helcl for
          exploitation.
2«       All known high grade iron ore deposits in the Middleback
          Range have been found associated with a type of low
          grade siliceous iron ore or banded iron formation
          similar to the "taconites" of the Lake Superior
           Pr.e-Cambrian iron ranges.
3»       The high grade ore bodies have been formed by replace-
         . ment of portions of the pre-existing folded banded
           iron formations and associated rocks.-     Incontrovert-
           able evidence of the mechanics of this replacement
           has not been obtained,but it is suggested that the
           iron was derived by leaching from adjacent portions
           of the same banded iron formations and was concentrated
           through the agency of lateraLly moving mixed hydro-
           thermal and heated supergene waters.     The ores appear
           to have been deposited only in suitably disposed
           structural traps within the banded iron formations.
No new deposits of high grade ore have been discovered
 in the Middletaack Range area daring the coarse of the
 present survey.

The finding of any possible new high grade iron ore
 deposits of economic size will be contingent upon
 the discovery of new areas of banded iron formations.
 The highly magnetic character of these rocks make
 them excellent subjects for detection, on a regional
 basis, by means of the air borne magnetometer.
 There is a very large area of Eyre Peninsula
 potentially capable of containing rocks similar to
 the formations of the Middleback Group.   For large
 seale exploratory work airborne magnetometer surveys
 should precede the more intensive prospecting by
 field parties.

The probable reserves of High grade iron ore within
 the Middleback Range are adequate for Australia's
 immediate requirements and at her present steel
 making capacity, but cannot be accepted as adequate
 as a long term source of raw material for a rapidly
 expanding steel industry.
Unless startlingly new discoveries of high grade iron
 ore.are made in Australia during the next few years,
 early positive steps should be made to initfebe the
 change over to low grade iron ore utilisation.
It is suggested that it would be within the national
 interest for the installation of a suitable benefic-
 iation plant to have been completed, and production
 of iron ore concentrates from low grade banded iron
 formations to have began, within the next 10 years.
Because of their uniform and simple composition and
 ready access to established centres of distribution
 the banded iron formations of the Middleback Range
 should have priority in plans for treatment and
exploitation.
                  - 21 -


                  REFERENCES

Dickinson, S.B. 1952.   Australian Steel - Key in Industrial

                           Progress and National Security.
                        Appendix to Ann.. Report of Director of
                        Mines and Government Geologist, South
                        Australia, for 1950.

Jack, R.L. 1922         The Iron Ore Resources of South Australia.

                        Geological Survey South Australia. Bull.9.

Ward, L.K. 1949         The Genesis of the Iron Ores of the

                        Middleback Range, South Australia* Proc.
                        Aust. Inst. Min. Met. N.S. Nos. 152-3
                           pp. 229-240.




  /-> /




                                           I
                                          /
