                                                                     Rept.Bk. 35/60
        >         .                     ..                      . ' '•




                            DEPARTMENT OP MINES
                              SOUTH AUSTRALIA




                 GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA

•   .             •    .            .            .   •.   '•-




            MAGNETIC OBSERVATIONS IN THE MIDDLEBACK RANGE AREA
                           GEOPHYSICAL-REPORT 1/53.




                                        by   .
                                 D. McPHARLIN
                            ASSISTANT. GEOPHYSICIST.
               DEPARTMENT OF MINES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
               GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
    MAGNETIC OBSERVATIONS IN THE MIDDLEBACK RANGES AREA
                       GEOPHYSICAL REPORT 1/53

Summary
              This is a composite of some earlier reports vix., 1/51
and ij/51 together with some additional information and deals
with,attempts to trace magnetic "banded iron formations under
alluvial cover.

INTRODUCTION:
              During observations-by C. Kerr Grant, S. A. Mining
Review No, 90, it was established that the steeply dipping iron
bearing quartzite formations, common to this area, gave rise to
considerable magnetic anomalies.       It was then suggested that these
could be used to trace such formations in alluvial covered areas.
              Under the direction of. Dr. K. R. Miles, who was conducting
a regional geological survey of this area, observations of the varia
                                                                         1
          •



tion of the vertical magnetic intensity were made at intervals along
traverses designed to intersect possible buried extensions of iron
bearing quartzite formations.
AREAS INVESTIGATED:
              The locality plan Fig, 1 shows the areas A,B,C,D,E,F,
in which observations were carried out.
              Areas A,B,D,E and F are- all in the vicinity of the
Middleback Range, which rims approximately north and south, some
twenty miles west of Whyalla, rising to a maximum of some fifteen
hundred feet above sea level.
              Most of the terrain surrounding the range is of compara-
tively low relief being in the main covered by sandy alluvium upon
which stunted vegetation, typical of the lower rainfall region of
this.State, has become established.
              Area C is just to the north of Iron Knob, which is about
twenty five miles north of the Middleback Range.
GEOLOGY:
              The geology of this region is the subject of a bulletin
to be issued by this department, and at present in the course of
preparation by Dr. K. R. Miles.
       Briefly however, the Midaieback Ranges are the synclinal
portions of much more extensive folded beds, thought to have been
deposited in the Middle Pre-Cambrian or Archaean era.     Preservation
of the range from erosion, which has reduced the level of most of
the surrounding terrain, is accredited to the extremely hard
nature of the banded iron bearing quartzite, which is a feature of
the range.

       The banded ferruginous quargzite as previously mentioned,
is responsible for the major magnetic anomalies in the area;
specimens showing a high percentage of magnetite amongst the
ferruginous material forming the dark bands through the lighter
quartzite base.
       This material is regarded as the source of the iron in
the rich hematite deposits held under lease by the Broken Hill
Proprietary Company Limited,   The structural and genetic
associations between the deposits and the quartzites has been dis-
cussed in the bulletin in preparation by Dr, Miles,
       Running parallel and to the west of the main range a line
of low hills which has for refierence purposes, been designated
the "Camel Hill Line" of hills appears to be the surface expression
of one limb of another synclinal fold.     Apart from this type of
formation exhibiting the banded iron bearing quartzites, most other
rock outcrops in the area are, with the exception of some, quartz rid
ridges along fault planes, of granitic or gneissic type, and
generally occur in the form of small rounded knolls rising only
slightly above the surrounding alluvium,

TECHNIQUE
      . Observations were carried out with a Hilger and Watts
vertical magnetic force variometer, stations being established at
one tenth mile intervals along traverses whose relative.positions
were fixed by the use of aerial photographs.     Drift control was
obtained by the use of the closed loop technique;    closures being
made after periods of three to four hours.     As no change greater
than 30 gammas was measured at the repeat stations, errors due to
drift should not be of any significance in dealing with these
anomalies of several thousand gammas,
RESULTS
          Reference is made to areas A,B,C,D,E,F, the locations of
which are shown on Pig, 1,     The results obtained in each area are
dealt with separately below.
Area A
          This area includes the line of low hills referred to
previously as the "Camel Hill Line" which had been assumed by some
authorities to be erosion residuals of one continuous band of mag-
netic ferruginous quartzite.
          Magnetic evidence presented in the form of profiles
 of vertical magnetic intensity variations indicates that there are
 several areas where the supposed continuous line can be crossed
without any evidence of the large magnetic anomaly, associated
with known outcrops of the iron bearing qugrtzifce material.
 This is the case in most of the larger gaps between outcrops, most
 of the smaller gaps showing some evidence of continuity, magnetic
 anomalies of up to seven thousand gammas being observed.
 Area B

           As has been mentioned earlier the "Camel Hill Line"
 is thought to be the surface outcrop of one limb of a synclinal
 fold, the axis of which by virtue of the westerly dipping outcrop
 beds should be located west of the Camel Hill,    Outcropping to
 the west however are a number of floors of gneissic granite, which
 some geologists claim to be. outcrops of the basement above which
were deposited.the Middleback Group of formations, of which the
 banded quartzites form a part.    By implication, therefore, the
 iron bearing quartzite beds, which dip below the surface in the>
 vicinity of Camel Hill should return to the surface in the alluv-
 ial coveredarea between Camel Hill.and the exposed granites.
          No magnetic anomalies comparable to those over the out-
 crops of banded ferruginous quartzite material could be found, and
 it can therefore be assumed that beds of magnetic ferruginous
 quartzite do not approach the surface within the area investigated.
If the formation does exist, the material must have undergone alter-
ation in such a way as to remove its magnetic properties;   e,g,
magnetite oxidized to hematite or limonite, or possibly altered
by metasomatic action.
           It is thought probable that the trough of low readings
extending in a northwest direction from the northern.end of the gap
in the range may be associated with the end of the magnetic beds,
which would thus appear to have been cut off at considerable depth,
except on the most northern of this set of traverses, where an
anomaly of 1 ,000 gammas would appear to be. associated with a remnant
of the formation..
Area C .
           •A northerly extension of the iron bearing quartzite for-
mation associated with the Iron Knob hematite deposits for a
distance of about one mile is indicated by an anomaly of 3000 -
i+000 gammas.   This anomaly, which has the appearance of an
anticline pitching downwards to the north, terminates in the
vicinity of a fault located on geological evidence between the
anomaly and a somewhat smaller magnetic anomaly south of the
Corunna Hills, a range geologically younger formations than the
banded ferruginous quartzites of the Middleback Ranges.
Area D

           This survey was undertaken in an alluvial covered valley
which runs approximately in a northwest-southeast direction inter-
secting the north-south line of the Middleback Range.
           The large magnetic anomaly can be associated with the
banded iron bearing quartzite formation,, outcropping to the north,
which may be seen to extend under the alluvia:! cover, above which
the anomaly was mapped.
           This anomaly has an abrupt termination just before
outcrops of schist on the scputhern edge of. the valley, which could
be caused by upward or downward pitching of the formation or
termination against a fault.    Further investigation possibly
including drilling would be necessary: to establish the exact cause.
Areas E and F
           The Middleback Range consists of a-number of keel-shaped
formations the major axes of which run north and south.    Limbs of
these keels appear to pass out into the surrounding plain disappear-
ing under the alluvium, in which the only evidence of -underlying
rock is provided by small rounded rises of granitic material.
              No evidence of any continuation of the limbs of
the keel shaped formations was obtained, suggesting termination
of these limbs close to where they disappear under the alluvium.
Additional Work
               Some additional work was undertaken over the Ash
Range, which contains a form of limonitic chert but no evidence of
any significant magnetic anomaly characteristic of the banded
ferruginous quartzites was obtained.     A small area in the centre
of the Kimba Gap was found to exhibit a ma:gnetic anomaly of several
thousand gammes but this did not extend far beyond the limits of an
outcrop of banded ferruginous quartzite.
CONCLUSIONS

               This work has indicated additional factual information
of assistance in regional structural mapping of magnetic iron
bearing-quartzite formations, where no outcrops exist.
              Much of the evidence obtained has been negative, but
has provided a test of geological hypotheses, and has supplied
data useful in planning exploratory drilling.
Associated Drawings.
               53 - U7
               53-53
              - 53 - 45
               53 - US


                                          D. McPHARLIN
                                     ASSISTANT GBOPHYSICIST.
23/4/53.                             -
                  S. A.    DEPT.       OF       INES            Iri-rZ/ca-/ sctr/i".' 201W   r f
                                                                       40 Chns, to / inch
                     MAGNETOMETER SURVEY
                               AREA    A               A*
[ origin a/s by                                                   de:
1D. McPhaHin              MIDDLEBACK       RANGES       /f /?
                                                                    3-3-5.3
                      LINES         OF   EQUAL      VERTICAL          MAGNETIC   INTENSITY




                                     Contour    interval      1000     Gammas
                                               Scale     S00 feei +o Isnch




j
m    co
< v;«
i




                                                 S. A, 'DEPT. O F   MINES
                                                                                  ApprovedPassed             Scale 9oo'4o !"
                                          MAGNETOMETER                SURVEY
                                                    A R E A *d '                                   Jcd.J-r    53-4G
                                               MIDDLEBACK       RANGE                              Ckd.       DE
          mttndmen!   End   Da re                                                  Direao!         Exd.      Date S-S-^3
                                                 AREA         E
    PROFILES             SHOWING    VARIATION     -Of       VERTICAL                  MAGNETIC     INTENSITY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %       r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A R EA         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINES            OF   EQUAL   VERTICAL           MAGNETIC       INTENSITY




                                                                                                                                           A R EA          C
                                                                                                                              RON     K N O B - CORUNNA                 AREA

                                                                                                                 LINES   OF   EQUAL       VERTICAL        MAGNETIC              INTENSITY




 Honz.      2" to       Imile
 Ver h                to 7000 qamrr.as




                                                                                                                                                                                            Contour    \ n + e rv 3 1 \QOO Gammas

                                                                                                                                                                                             Scale

                                              AREA            F
   PROFILES              SHOWING         VARIATION      OF    VERTICAL                  MAGNETIC     \NTENSlTY




                                                                       /
                                         MIDDLEBACK     RAHGE




                                         /
                                         I
                                                        V




                                                                                                                                 Contour    Interval    sooo   Gammas
                                             \
                                                                                                                                 3 o^ 1          "to   Imile



            ^^ ^Lw,
  .. riz.   2"   to      imile
                                                                                           ',0-
k/e r h          to     looo gammas
                                                                                       i
                                                                   ^       ,   -» *




                                                             / V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mMWMBW         maomtnu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ? "        fo   /rr7/'/e
                                                                                                                                                                                            MAGNETOMETER                            SURVEY                                         P. Mcp          M   l   «" p   <    jm   |*m»




                                                                                                                                                                                                      A R E A S    B ,C,   E   &    F                                              J. A4c   C      b 6 ~ 4-b
                                                                                                                                                                  ::
                                                                                                                                                                       os-ztj/u/s                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                              MIDDLEBACK                   RANGES                                                    ft R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7- 3 -S3
