                            Economic Geology
                            Vol. 58, 1963, pp. 375-390




                                             THE        NORTHERN                 RHODESIAN                  COPPERBELT:
                                                     IS    IT    A CLASSIC               EXAMPLE               OF      SYN-
                                                                   GENETIC             DEPOSITION                 •

                                                                        JOSEPH           L. GILLSON

                            AT the Symposium    on "SyngenesisversusEpigenesis"in New York in Feb-
                            ruary, 1962,Dr. J. j. Brummerspokeon the syngenetic theoryof ore genesis
                            as appliedto depositsin Northern Rhodesia. Many of Dr. Brummer'sre-
                            marks were basedupon the volume, "Geologyof the Northern Rhodesian
                            CopperBelt," editedby Dr. F. Mendelsohn,ChiefGeologistof the Roan Ante-
                            lope CopperMines, Ltd., and publishedin 1961by MacDonaldand Co. of Lon-
                            don in time for the SeventhMining and MetallurgicalCongress.
                               Dr. Bruinruerunquestionably  has a wide knowledgeof the district. His
                            thesisin 1955 describedthe "Geologyof the'Roan AntelopeMine" and was
                            presentedat a meetingof the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (1). He is
                            alsothe authorof severalunpublishedcompanyreports. He contributedfour
                            photomicrographs   of polishedsectionsof ore from Roan Antelope,which,inci-
                            dentally, are the only ones in the volume.
                               Sincethe meetingthe writer has critically reviewedthe volume on the
                            "Geologyof the NorthernRhodesJan  CopperBelt." The followingcomments
                            are offeredto counterthe impressionleft at the meetingby the proponentsof
                            syngenetictheory that:
                                1. The volume "Geologyof the Northern RhodesJanCopperbelt"can be
                            usedas the "bible" of that creedcalledsyngeneticism,  a belief acceptedtoday
                            by most South African and Australiangeologistswith a fervor akin to that
                            inspiredby religiousrather than lay dogma.
                                2. That all of the authors who contributedsectionsof the volume, believed
                            in that creedwithout question.
                                3. That there was ample supply of copperand cobalt in solutionin the
                            oceanwatersat the time the enclosing sediments were deposited  to precipitate
                            all of thesemetals,which camefrom the erosionof a nearbyland mass.
                                4. That there is no questionin anyone'smind but that the mineraldepo-
                            sition precededthe intensefolding of the Precambrianformations.
                                5. That recrystallization
                                                        accompanying this foldinginvolvedno introduc-
                            tion of ne•vmaterial,but was simplya rearrangement  of that alreadypresent.
                                 6. Therewasno mentionof the factthat similarcopperdeposits
                                                                                          are found
                            in Katanga acrossthe border from Northern Rhodesia, and that these de-
                            positsoccurin bedsof a higherstratigraphic
                                                                     horizon,and differentlithological
                            character than those in Northern                      Rhodesia.

                               x This paper originatedas a Discussionat the Symposiumon "SyngenesisversusEpigenesis"
                            held in New York, Feb. 14, 1962, under the joint auspicesof the Society of Economic Geolo-
                            gists and the Societyof Mining Engineersof the American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical
                            and Petroleum Engineers.
                                                                                        375




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                            376                                           JOSEPH L. GILLSON

                               May I take the liberty of discussingthesesix points,not with the hopeof
                            changingany views already held, but to point out to a rising generationof
                            studentsof economicgeologythat they shouldread the whole book, and not
                            part of it, and other writings that haYe been omitted in the preparation of
                            "The Geologyof the Copperbelt."
                                  Point/.--This            is the thesis that the volume is the "bible" of the creed of
                            syngeneticism.
                               The principal discipleof that creed is Dr. W. G. Garlick, xvhodescribes
                            the theory on pages145 to 165 of the volume. The editor, Mr. Mendelsohn,
                            however, in introducingthe sectionby Dr. Garlick, warned the reader that
                            "thereare somefeaturesthat a syngenetictheorydoesnot adequatelyexplain."
                               In developinghis hypothesis,Dr. Garlick startswith the analogyof the
                            Kupferschieferof Mansfield,Germany,which is cited by him as the one in-
                            controvertibleexampleof a sedimentarysulfidedepositof commercialimpor-
                            tance. Ignoring the blasphemythat there are still a few agnostics(2) who
                            do not acceptthis origin of the Kupferschieferas so obviousa fact, neverthe-
                            less Dr. Garlick           is not careful to caution his readers that most of the ore beds
                            of the Copperbeltare not blackshaleslike the Kupferschiefer,but rather arena-
                            ceousbeds with much cross bedding and some are dolomites. Moreover a
                            depositof sedimentarysulfidesshould,if the Kupferschieferis the type ex-
                            ample,be ¾erywidespread,of uniform composition,shouldhave pyrite as the
                            principalsulfide,and in additionto coppershouldcarry lead and zinc, and
                            shouldhave as much nickel as cobalt (3). These are not the features of the
                            Copperbelt.
                                Dr. Garlick explainsthat he was driven to the thesisof syngeneticorigin
                            of these deposits,since no igneousrock is exposedand no channelwaysor
                            fissuresthroughwhich solutionscame,have been found. I-Ie emphasizes,       of
                            course,the very remarkableconfinements   of the ore to one sedimentaryforma-
                            tion (Fig. 8), althoughhe must bring out sooneror later that the ore occurs
                            up and down through that formation, even in the same mine. Furthermore,
                            barren zoneshave exactly the samelithology, texture and mineralogy as some
                            of the richest zones.
                                Dr. Garlick ignoresthe gabbro,which is found near each major deposit,
                            and seemsobliviousto the fact that large massesof gabbroare, in many parts
                            of the world, an offshootfrom a large batholithin depth. I-Ie is alsooblivious
                            to the fact so commonlyobservedaroundlarge igneousmasses,that large scale
                            transfer of material, seemedto require no visible channelways.
                                In developinghis hypothesis,   Dr. Garlick had muchtroubleexplainingthe
                            wide spreadingzoning. He said that it is a function of facies changes,and
                            cites examplesat Baluba, Nkana and Chambishi.
                                In describingNkana, later in the volume, J. Jordaan said that "at Min-
                            dola, the mineral zoning is not associatedwith changesin facies in the sedi-
                            ments. . . but it is in the North and Southorebody."
                                That the zoningproblemis complicatedis indicatedby the descriptionof
                            Nkana in "which cobalt is concentratedin the chalcopyritezone at Mindola,
                            but at the North orebody,the highestconcentrations  of cobalt,are in the mixed
                            bornite-chalcopyrite
                                              zone. _Atplaces,the zonal arrangementis pyrite, then




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                        NORTHERN RHODESI•IN COPPERBELT                                                              377

                           chalcopyrite
                                    andcarrollite,
                                                 followed
                                                        by mixedbornite,chalcopyrite
                                                                                  andcar-
                           rollite,andfinallychalcopyriteand carrolliteat the base."
                              Dr. Garlickexplainshis idea of zoningon page155 of the volume,but
                           althoughthismaybe an idealizedplanof the zoning,it doesnotprovea case
                           for syngeneticism,in the opinionof this critic.
                              Dr. Garlick then attemptsto flatten out the tightly foldedsedimentary
                            membersof the Roan series,and showythe relation of the present ore zones
                            to whatmayhavebeentheiroriginalposition
                                                                  as nearlyfiat lyingbedson a
                            seabottomcloseto an old shoreline. For formationsas tightly foldedas these
                            are now,this unrollingbackto Precambrian
                                                                   timestakessomedoing. The




                               FiG. 1. Ore depositsand pyritic and barren zonesrelatedto the shoreline from
                             Chamibishito Roan Antelope. Reproducedfrom Figure 48, page 157, in the vol-
                             ume "The Geology of the Northern Rhodesian Copper Belt," in section on the
                             SyngeneticTheory, written by W. G. Gatlick.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                            378                                             JOSEPH L. GILLSOAr

                            map on page 157 showsonly the area on the west side of the Kafue anticline
                            from Roan Antelopeto Chambishi. Whether it is typical of the many scores
                            of other miles on the txvo side of the anticline is inferred. but not proven.
                            Figure 48 is reproducedhere as Figure 1.
                               The final clincherof the syngenetictheory is that the presenttexturesof
                            the ores are the result of recrystallization
                                                                       under heat and pressureof meta-
                            morphism,during which there was absolutelyno introductionof material.
                                  This will be discussed under Point 5.
                                 Point 2.--This               is the tenet that each of the contributors to sections of the
                            Geologyof the Northern RhodesJan    Copperbeltsubscribeto the Syngenetic
                            hypothesis. Let us examinethis statement.
                               B. B. Brock,authorof part of Chapter4, "The structuralsettingof the
                            Copperbelt,"definitelydisagrees,and mostforcefully. On page89 he wrote:

                                                                   \\        \

                                                                        ,        ,
                                                         .         ,J •,• ',, ,, '--.


                                                          /             '•                 '..x.x'.g•.,...1.             !         '
                                                          /                      +            ,,,. ,•,
                                                                                      .
                                                  ..       :., c•. m,...,              :        , ,,     ,,?                       ..
                                                         .......                       I               Oo,•.


                            Nchanga, Bancroft, and Kipushi; and the subsidiarylineamentthrough Bwana
                            Mkubwa, Mufulira, and Etoile du Congo. Reproducedfrom Figure 26, page 86.
                            in the volume"The Geologyof the Northern RhodesianCopperBelt," in section
                            on the Structural Setting of the CopperBelt, xvrittenby B. B. Brock.
                                 The perfectionof the copperlineament• over a distanceof 200 miles or more,
                            nmst be nearly unique in the world....
                                Any theory regarding the origin of the copper that ignores this remarkable
                            alignmentmight be laying itself opento a charge of arbitrary selectivityof data....
                                The metallogenicprovince with which we are dealing, of which the Northern
                            RhodesianCopperbeltforms only a part, when viewed in the overall view of
                            Africa, is very much of a unity . . . it must be rare in the history of economic
                            geology,that suchan importantmineral provincehas never been comprehensively
                            treated as an entity.
                               Brock'sdiagramson the structuralframeworkof Northern Rhodesia,and
                            on the main copperlineamentare reproducedhere as Figure 2 and on the
                            geologicmap, Figure 7 and the structuralsettingof the area is shownin
                            Figures 3 and 4.
                               2 American readers may understand the word alignment better than lineament, with due
                            apologiesto Dr. Brock, and the English language.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                        NORTHERN RHODESI.4N COPPERBELT                                                              379

                                 F. Mendelsohn,
                                             Chapter7 on Ore Genesis
                                                                   andChapter11, on RoanAnte-
                           lope; he believesin syngenesis.
                              W. G. Garlick, Parts of Chapters7 and 8 and Chapter9 on Chambishi;
                           Dr. Garlick of coursebelievesin syngenesis.
                                 J. E.G. Schwellnus,
                                                  Chapter9, Bancroft-Nchanga.
                                  One commentof his is pertinent:
                            in the northernpart of the mine,threeboreholesshowpoormineralizationin the
                            undeformed  ore units,andpronounced chalcopyrite-bornite
                                                                                 mineralization
                                                                                              alongthe
                            slatycleavagedirectionsbothwithin and acrossthe beddingin the more highly
                            deformedunits. Althoughthis doesnot suggestan epigeneticsourcefor the ore,
                            it doesindicatea redistributionof primary ore mineralsby dynamicmetamorphism.




                               Fro. 3. The LufilianArc. Reproduced
                                                                 from Figure 27, page90, of the volume
                            "The Geologyof the NorthernRhodesianCopperBelt" in the sectionon Structural
                            Evolution,written by W. G. Garlick. This showsthe positionof the Kafue
                            Anticline.



                                D. M. McKinnonand N.J. Smit, Part of Chapter9, Nchanga. A number
                            of the descriptions
                                              and commentsof thesegentlemenare so pertinent,that
                            longerquotationsare madefrom their writings.
                               The hostrocks(page256) includea wide rangeof sediments       of continental
                                                                                                         and
                            marine origin, and the depositsare all found in more or lessfoldedstructures
                                                                                                       ....
                            At Nchanga,ore canbe tracedalmostcontinuously     in placesfrom granitethrough
                            more than 300 feet of sediments,including quartzite, sandstoneand quartzite,
                            boulderconglomerate,   arkose,Lower Bandedshale,micaceousBandedsandstone,
                            Feldspathicquartziteand Upper BandedShale. . . zoningcan be seenacrossthe
                             strata.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           380                                           JOSEPH         L. GILLSON

                               Ore genesis(page 267) The basemetal provincein which the depositoccurs
                            must be studied. . . and not piecemeallike a blind man describingan elephant
                            onlyafter feelinghis tail. An arc-shaped
                                                                   belt of deformedrocksextendsmorethan
                           400milesthroughRhodesia
                                                 andKatangaandit is withinthis arc that the cop.
                                                                                              per
                            belt rocks occur . . . but the belt is itself contained within a base metal prowrice
                            stretchingto the southwest,which coversmorethan 80,000squaremiles,and con-
                            tains at least 300 knmvn occurrencesof copperminerals . . . and each occurrence
                            can be related to a bit of exposedgranitic and allied rockswhich extends. . .
                            throughKafue,NorthernRhodesia       asbroughtout by Phillips(10).
                               ß . . it is not possibleto say how closethe post-Katangagranitesapproachthe
                            copperbelt   undersedimentary  cover,but thereis evidence
                                                                                    of somehightemperature
                            metamorphic     effects,and the great post-Kundelungu gabbroidintrusions,which
                            lie within the copperbelt,suggestthe presenceof underlyingmagma....




                                                                                  \.




                                                    ß   END KWIOE.LU#0U DRA#1TL               ß    HA0#E.?I ?It
                                                                                                                          ..,o.
                                                                                                                  Hr HAT ITIr 0EPOSI?

                                                   •'   (NI I[UleLLU#OU
                                                                     SI*•#ITE               - •.   SUDIIOIADI*
                                                                                                            STNUCTUNAL
                                                                                                                    OINœCTIO#
                                                   J    NIDOIqETOSO')L•TIC
                                                                   ZOIr                       A    LEAD
                                                                                                      / ZINC/COPPER

                                 Fro. 4. The NorthernRhodesia-Katanga-Angola
                                                                         basemetalbelt. The R. K. A.
                            Deformed Beltcontainsbedded copper-cobalt
                                                                    deposits.The InnerMargindeposits
                            containoneor moreof the followingmetals:lead,uranium,copper,zinc,cadmium,
                            germanium,  vanadium.Reproduced  fromFigure89, page269of thevolume"The
                            Geology of theNorthernRhodesianCopper Belt"in thesection
                                                                                   onNchanga   xvritten
                            by D. M. McKinnon  andN.J. Smit. The position   of Nchangais shownin the
                            Deformed Belt, closeto the Inner Margin.

                              On permeability(page273) it is doubtful
                                                                    thatthepermeability
                                                                                      of theArkose
                            hasever beenso low as to preventsolutionspassingbothalongandacrossthe
                            bedding
                                  . . . oncehavingreachedtheTransitionBeds,whichprobably  havebeen
                            more or lessbrecciatedfroin the time of the formation of the syncline,solutions
                            could find a ready avenue of movement.
                              On Genesis (page274) the availableevidence doesnot demonstrate beyond
                            doubttheepigeneticor syngenetic
                                                         origin. . . (but) the syngenetic
                                                                                        theoryis in-
                            adequate
                                   to explainthecopperconcentrationin a varietyof hostrocks,andwhy
                            onlyonesixthof the copperoccurs in the formation mostfavourable for syn-
                             geneticcopper,the Lower BandedShales.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                        NORTHERN RHODES'I.4N COPPERBELT                                                             381

                                 j. Jordaan,Chapter10, Nkana.
                                 Paragenesis
                                           . .. (page 319) Pyrite xvasthe first mineralto form. Cattierite
                           was next and continued until after the formation of carrollite.                                 Carrollite continued
                           to form during the early stagesof depositionof chalcopyrite. . . which continued
                           until after the formation                 of bornite.         Chalcocite commenced to form after the
                           deposition  of the bornite,whichit replaces. . . in generalthe greatestconcentration
                           of ore is in the Cherryore and the leastin the Low Grade argillite.
                               Mindola uraniumdeposit(page 325) occurredin the Transition zonebetween
                            normal ore formation and the dolomitesof the barren gap. The uranium occurs
                           where coppermineralizationis scarce,and the uraniumgradevariesin an inverse
                            ratio to the coppercontent.
                                The age of the uraniummineralizationwas determinedby Bowie (4) as about
                            520 million years....
                                In the South ore body, the coppermineralizationis limited to the highly con-
                            torted, fissile,and veined portionsof the carbonaceous  shales. . . no signs of
                            metamorphic   migrationor hydrothermalalterationhavebeenobservedin the ores
                            ß. . the chertyore which is heavilymineralizedin sulphides,is similar in chemical
                            and mineralogicalcompositionto the Low Grade and Hanging Wall argillites,
                            which are generally poorly mineralized. A physicalcontrol is indicated--the
                            Cherty ore is laminatedwhereasthe other bedsare generallydenseand massive.
                                 The reader should not fail to notice that Mr. Jordaan describesa para-
                            geneticsequence, andthengoeson to saythat thereis no signof metamorphic
                            migration. It is only by metamorphicmigrationthat the syngeneticists
                                                                                              ex-
                            plain the parageneticsequenceof the growth and replacementof the ore
                            minerals,one by the other.
                               O. Winfield, Chapter X, Chibuluma.
                               Economicmineralization(page 334) is confinedto a sericiticquartzite,lying
                            approximately30 feet belowthe Upper Roan-LowerRoan contact. . . where it is
                            well mineralizedwith chalcopyrite. Certain layers of the Ore quartzite rich in
                            chalcopyriteor linnaeite, show megascopically conspicuous tourmalineas short
                            prismatic crystals.
                                 The correlation(page 339) betweenthe rich chalcopyritemineralizationand
                            the micaceous facies of the Ore formation is interpreted as being due to an
                            originally greater argillaceouscontentin the centerof the basin.
                               The chalcopyritezonesare arrangedsymmetrically    on either sideof the central
                            pyritic zoneand the sequence   barren-chalcopyrite-pyrite,
                                                                                     followsthe directionof
                            the aqueouscurrentsas deducedfrom crossbedding... with selectiveprecipitation
                            of the coppernearer the shoreline, where streamsintroducedcopper,cobaltand
                            iron in solution into a body of standing water . . . the streamsmust have had
                            greater concentrations   of metalsthan in the caseof the more slowly deposited
                            Roan Ore Shale type of mineralization. The aeolian sedimentsare completely
                            barren of sulphidesonly a few feet belowaequeous   sedimentscontainingore.
                                  Yes, Mr. Winfield believesin syngenesis.
                                  J. B. Lee-Potter,ChapterXI, Baluba.
                               Chalcopyrite(page 350) is the main ore mineral. It is seento enclosegangue
                            minerals. The orebodylies in light green, tremolitic dolomiteor schist,immedi-
                            ately overlyingthe Footwall conglomerate.Above are pyritic shales.
                                  H. A. Groen, ChapterXII, Muœulira.
                                  The ore zone is in about the middle of the Lower Roan, mostly in the A, B, and
                             C horizons. Slump structures(page 428) occur in the B and C orebodies,espe-




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                             382                                          JOSEPH L. GILLSON

                             cially near the fringes . . . banded quartzites in which mineralized and barren
                             layersalternatecan be tracedlaterallyinto brecciasin which fragmentsof the
                            mineralizedlayers carry the samemineralizationas in the undisturbedrock. This
                             indicatesthat the mineralizationprecededthe slumping.
                            Theseslumpstructures   are oneof Dr. Garlick's"proofs"of pre-folding
                                                                                               min-
                            eralization.This criticmightcomment   that he hasseenmanyexamples    of
                            mineralized(and unmineralized)brecciafragmentsand matrix in "breccia
                            pipes"of obviousigneousorigin.
                                    In •vellbeddedand crossbeddedrocks,sulphides
                                                                               are usuallyconcentrated
                                                                                                     on
                            beddingplanes. . . in B ore body bornire is abundantand in C, the dominant
                            sulphidemineralis chalcocite.The sulphidemineralsrarely exhibitcrystalform,
                            and commonlyhave the appearanceof replacingboth matrix and grains of the
                            host rock, indiscriminately.
                                    P. J. Pienaar, Chapter XIII,                   Bwana Mkubwa.
                                 Most of the ore minerals are confined to the lower section of the ore formation
                            whichcontainsthree major ore bodiesseparatedby variablethicknesses
                                                                                             of barren
                            or poorly mineralized rocks . . . there is no evidence that concentration of ore
                            minerals is preferential in certain rock types . . . althoughthe ore at Bwana
                            Mkubwa is entirely of supergeneorigin, the ore beds have been faulted and
                            intrudedby quartzgabbro,whichis the idealsettingfor the introductionof copper
                            minerals. The suiteof trace elementsin the ore bodiesis typical of manyhydro-
                            thermal deposits,and their presenceis difficultto explain, if the copperwas
                            syngeneticallydeposited.
                               Summary: for an igneoushydrothermal origin; Brock, McKinnon and
                            Smit, and probablyJordaanand Piennar.for syngeneticorigin; Mendelsohn,
                            Garlick and Winfield, doubtful, or noncommittal; Schwellnus,Lee-Potter,
                            and Groen.
                                    Thus the vote may slightlyfavor the syngeneticists,
                                                                                     but it is by no means
                            a one sided decision.
                                 Point &--There was an amplesupplyof copperfrom an erodingland-
                            mass.

                                 The syngeneticists,
                                                  as exemplifiedby Dr. Brummerat the Symposiumin
                            New York, wave a hand in the direction of a Precambrian shore line, and
                            point out that an erodingmassof crystallinerock, with an averageamount
                            of coppercanyield a great dealof metal. Garlick (page 152) citesan average
                            analysisof 329 Americanigneousrockscontaining0.01167%. Simple arith-
                            metic shows that a cubic mile of such a rock contains                                          1.4 million        tons of
                            copper.
                              If the syngeneticistsare right, and the copper was depositedin basins
                           within then fiat-lying marine sedimentsthat have sincebeenintenselyfolded,
                           and muchof them eroded,we mustmakean estimateof the amountoriginally
                           deposited. What remains can only be a small percent of the original, since
                           only a few infoldedsynclinesremain. C.F. Davidson(5) guessedthe original
                           amountat 500 million tonsof copper. That figure may be high, but probably
                           not unreasonablyso.
                              If the arc of coastline, along•vhichthesesedimentswere depositedwas
                           400 mileslong, and a total of 500 nililion tons of copperwas deposited,then




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                        NORTHERN              RHODESI/IN             COPPERBELT                                     383

                            alongeachof the 400 mileswasa part--say 1,250,000tons. This copperwas
                            concentratedin a relatively thin layer of sediments,in most casesless than
                            50 feet,yet all of that coppercameout of 0.92 of a cubicmile of erodingrock.
                                How did all of the otherdetritalmaterialget carriedaway beyondthe basin
                            in which the copperwas depositedin sucha thin layer?
                                The syngeneticists   seemnot to have tried to explain it. They say simply,
                            "there was enoughcopperto accountfor all we seein thesedeposits." Yes,
                            there was copper,but alsothere •vasiron and manganesein greater quantity--
                            where are they? There were lead, zinc, nickel and many other metals,if the
                            sourcewas an averagecrystallinerock with a few parts per million of most
                            of the common            metals.
                                The problem, therefore, is not so much quantity of copper, but concen-
                            trating all of it in one very narrow basin,at the sametime getting rid of an
                            enormousmassof detritus, which had to be carried farther away from shore.
                            Also, there had to be a very selectiveprecipitationof copper,cobalt, and
                            only a little iron out of solutionswhich must have carried many other cations,
                            if one dependsas a source,the averagecompositionof the typical crystalline
                            rock.
                               Point 4.--This is the thesisthat there is no questionin any one'smind,
                            that the mineral depositionprecededthe intensefolding.
                                The syngeneticists have to adoptthat view, for if the ore depositionwere
                            post-folding,they would not have a theory. Even if the ore were deposited
                            beforethe folding, it still could have beenintroducedfrom an igneoussource.
                            However, the reasonableprobability is that the igneousintrusion, and the
                            intensefolding were more or lesscontelnporaneous.Such intensefolding as
                            took placein this area, hasseldom,if ever in geologicalhistory,occurredwith-
                            out accompanying   igneousintrusion.
                                Sincethe pre-foldingdate of depositionis suchan essentialfeature of the
                            theory, one would expectto have the evidencefor it tabulated,and well docu-
                            mented so that the reader would be ready to agree that the proponentsat
                            leasthad madethe bestcasepossible. One xvouldexpectto find descriptionsof
                            ore bedsdisplacedby post mineral faulting; of stretcheddeformableminerals
                            such as chalcocite,and crushed brittle minerals such as pyrite, carrollite or
                            linnaeite.
                               As a matter of fact,therehasbeenremarkablelittle faultingon the Copper-
                            belt. Figure 184 on page471 showsa geologicalsectionin the ShovelPit at
                            the Bwana Mkubwa, and showsa fault which has brought Ore formation
                            againstthe gabbro,but there is no indicationthat there was any actual ore
                            displaced. Small faultsare describedat Nkana on page308, but there seems
                            to have beenno displacement.Also at Nkana, displacement     of the Ore for-
                            mation by faulting at Mindola is describedon page 327, but the statement
                            is made:

                            Although the beds are displacedby a zone of faulting, the assay hangingwall and
                            footwall of the orebodyare undisturbed.
                               This is about as positivea statelnentas could be made, that the ore was
                            depositedafter the faulting!




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                             384                                          JOS•EPH L. GILLS•ON

                                Under the heading"Summaryof the Evidence"written by Dr. Mendel-
                             sohn,p. 130-140, there is no mentionwhatsoeverof faulting. One can be
                             seasonablysure if ore were displacedby post mineral faulting, a big point
                             would be made of it.
                                There is no mentionof stretchingout of the ore mineralsunder the intense
                            folding, althoughthickeningof the ore in "keels" of major folds is shownin
                            many diagrams,as for instancein the Roan Antelope,Figures 131-132, at
                            Nkana, Figure 104 and in Figure 3 accompanying       the article by Darnley.
                            Since no writer makes a point of this, the thickeningmust mean simple re-
                            placement of favorable beds which themselveswere stretched and thickened
                            during the folding.
                               Mendelsohnstatedon page 141:
                                Within each depositthere is no direct associationbetweenfolds and ore shoots.
                            The ore shootspassimpartially, apart from attenuation and thickening, over folds
                            and to considerabledepths. Locally, ore shootsor mineral zonesparallel folds, but
                            this is exceptional.




                                                                                          ',4TS



                                 Fro. 5. blufflira. Cross-beddedpebbly arkose with barren shale fragments,
                            scoured into barren sediments in west, but overlying shale rich in disseminated
                            bornite in ore body. The western margin of the orebody is indicated by a heavy
                            line. Reproducedfrom Figure 36, page 137 in the volume "Geologyof the North-
                            ern Rhodesian Copper Belt" in the section on Ore Genesis by F. Mendelsohn.

                                 At Chibuluma,Winfield, a strong syngeneticist,makes some interesting
                            comments:

                                Pebblesup to 4 inches,and rarely 8 inchesin diameterin this sericiticgrit are
                            generallywell roundedwith one or two flattenedsurfaces. They consistof quartz
                            and quartziteand showa concentrationof coarsesulphideon their surfaces,espe-
                            cially on the pressureshadows,and commonlya smearingof the mica on the parts
                            of the pebblesbearing the brunt of the pressure. The disseminationof sulphide
                           rarelypersists
                                        morethan• inchinto the pebblesothat the centeris free of sulphide
                           exceptalongcracks. . . page336. Pyrite occursas smallcubesreplacingadjacent
                           quartzand feldspargrains. . . and alsotendsto form rich, roundedclotsup to 3
                           inchesin diametersuggestiveof diageneticconcretions. . . chalcopyritein places
                           followsshearsacrossthe bedding. Concentrationsof coarsergrainsof chalcopyrite
                           follow crossbeddinglaminationsand are richer on bottomsets.
                                 The sharpcut-offfrom barrento rich ore is shownin Figure section36,
                           page137,shownhereas Figure5. How this is usedto provesyngenetic
                           deposition
                                    is notclear.
                              Slumpbreccias  at Muliashi,Roan Antelope,are picturedin Figure 37.
                           page137,shownhereas Figure6. Thesebrecciafragments     containpyrite,
                           not copperore, whichmay or may not be significant.A pictureof sucha




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                         NORTHERN              RHODE$I.4N             COPPERBELT                                    385

                            slump structureat Mufulira is shownon page 163. Dr. Garlick is quoted
                            as sayingthat thesefeaturesprove that mineralizationprecededthe slumping.
                            Again it is not clear whether the mineralization is only pyrite, or copper
                            minerals.
                                  This slumpingmay be one of the best points to prove depositionof ore
                            mineralsduring sedimentation.As no one of the epigeneticists
                                                                                       has men-
                            tioned thesefeatures,the argumentmay have to be accepted. The writer has
                            seenmany fragmentsin breccias,replacedafter brecciation.
                                The best evidencefor mineral depositionafter folding is that advanced
                            by Brock (my Fig. 2). In Figure 7, theselines of alignmentare shown on
                            the GeologicMap. When one realizesthat theseruler-straightlines connect
                            the major mines into two groups, one on each side of the major anticline,
                            throughthe most contortedkind of structures,it seemsincredibleto believe
                            that primary depositionin the sedimentsas they lay flat on the sea floor,
                            could be confined into basins, so that after folding the depositsare all
                            perfectlyaligned,and are no where else.




                                                                                        INCHI:   $




                            ation of interbeddeddolomiteand pyritic dolomiticargillite. Reproducedfrom
                            Figure37, page137of thevolume"The Geologyof the NorthernRhodesian   Copper
                            Belt" in the sectionon Ore Genesisby F. Mendelsohn.

                               Beds of the Lower Roan carry ore only svhenthe limb of a closefold
                            crossesoneof Brock'slinesof alignment. Theselinesmustbe deepseated,
                            and if not faults, at least channelways.
                               Point5.--Possibleintroduction
                                                           of materialduringmetamorphism.  Just
                            asin thecaseof thedateof deposition
                                                              of thesulfideminerals
                                                                                  asbeingpre-or
                            post-folding,the syngenetic
                                                      theoryhad to demandthat the mineralizationwas
                            pre-folding--soit is with the metamorphism and recrystallization
                                                                                           that ac-
                            companied it. The syngenetic theoryhasto demandthat the recrystallization
                            was simplya remobilization
                                                     of elementsalreadypresentand that therewas no
                            introduction
                                       of material. To haveadmittedsuchan introduction, wouldhave
                            beento admitthat solutions
                                                     movedthroughthe "impermeable   rocks,"whereas
                            thenon-existence
                                          of identifiable
                                                       channelways
                                                                is oneof theirmajorarguments
                            againstthe hydrothermaltheory.
                                  It is a little amusing
                                                       thatthe syngeneticists
                                                                          thinkthatthereis nothing
                            strangein describing
                                               paragenesis
                                                        of the sulfides,and statingthat one was
                            later thanthe other. This movement
                                                            and replacement
                                                                         of onesulfideby
                            anotherrequiredthat iron, and in someplacesiron and copper,had to be




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                            386                                          JOSEPH          L. GILLSON




                              FIG.7. Geological mapof theNorthernRhodesianCopper Belt,reproduced
                           fromthemapfolded  in thepocketof thevolume"TheGeology of theNorthern
                           Rhodesian CopperBelt." Onthismap,thelinesshowing the"copperlineament"
                           of B. B. Brock(reproduced
                                                   in thisDiscussion
                                                                   asFig.2) aretraced.Thisgeo-
                           logical
                                 mapshows  thattheKafueAnticline
                                                               isnota simple
                                                                           archflankedbyparallel
                           bedsofbedded sediments,
                                                 butrathera mostcomplexstructure.Theorehorizon,
                           whichis in yellowon the originalmap,is not distinguishable
                                                                                    on thisblackand
                           whitereproduction.Although widespreadthroughout thearea,thehorizon carries
                           oreonlywherea limbof a tightfoldcrosses thelineof alignment.Thismustbe
                           a deep-seated
                                       structure,
                                                andalmostcertainly  a channelway.
                           stored off in some convenientwarehouseuntil it was needed. The iron
                           removed
                                 fromthebornitewhenit xvasreplaced
                                                                 by chalcocite,
                                                                            hadto go
                           somewhere.

                                Dr. Mendelsohn
                                            is silentonhowmuchmovement
                                                                    wasinvolved,
                                                                              simply
                          making the statementthat:
                           recrystallization
                                           of existingsulphides
                                                              duringmetamorphism
                                                                               wouldresult in a
                          similar(to Lindgren,
                                            Bateman)
                                                   orderof crystallization
                                                                        of thesulphides.
                                It will berecalled
                                                 thatin describing
                                                                Nkana,J. Jordaan
                                                                               stated(p. 327)
                          that therewasno signof metamorphic
                                                          migration.
                                In hisdiscussion
                                             of themetamorphism,
                                                             Dr. Mendelsohn
                                                                         wrote(p. 111):
                             Therocksof theCopperbelt,particularly
                                                                 argillites
                                                                          andargillaceousrocks,con-
                          tain significant
                                         amountsof the volatileelements, boron,fluorine,chlorineand




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                               NORTHERN RHODESI.4N COPPERBELT                                                              387

                   phosphorus,and carbon dioxide . . . (and) there were adequateamounts of all
                   the necessaryelementspresentto form these minerals . . . and the growth of new
                   minerals could have been achieved                         without       the addition         of material         from     an
                   external source.

                      In Appendix 1, p. 487-493, analysesof rocksand mineralsare tabulated.
                   In the unmineralizedrocksof the Katanga system,CO2 varies from 0.15 to
                   43.35 percent(the last beinga dolomite); there are two analysesfor fluorine,




                                                                                         L œ'END




                                                                                  I+ H

                                                                                  i         •


                      Zm. 8. •eolo•ical map of Roan-•u]iashi basin. Ore formation in black.
                   Reproducedfrom Figure 118, oppositepage 350, of the volume "The Geologyof
                   the Northern RhodesianCopper Belt," in the sectionon the Roan-Muliashi Basin
                   by J. B. Lee-Potter. This map shows the remarkable persistenceof the ore in
                   an horizon of the Lower Roan formation which is on the flanks of a syncline. The
                   southeastsection of the mine lies on the flanks of a very tight fold, but the ore
                   persiststhree quarters of the way around this limb.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                            388                                           JOSEPH L. GILLSON

                            one showsa trace, and the other 0.11%; B2Oais shownin one analysisonly,
                            as 0.03%; and there are five analysesshowingP205 which varies from .06
                            to .26 percent.
                                In rocksof the ore formations,CO2 varies from a trace to 22.80%; there
                            is one analysisfor fluorine, showing0.09%; there is one analysisfor boron,
                            showing0.03% B2Oa; and there are eight analysesfor P205, showing.03
                            to .26 percent.
                                These analysesare not very goodsupportfor Dr. Mendelsohn's"signifi-
                            cant" amountsof the volatiles. All studiesof ore depositshave indicatedthat
                            probably a vast amount of mineralizers passed on through during meta-
                            somatism,leavinglittle trace; but in Dr. Mendelsohn'sthesisthey couldnot
                            passon through,they had to stay where they are.
                                Meanwhile W. G. Darnley (6) in England and J. F. Vaes in Katanga
                            were making detailedstudiesof the rocks of the Copperbelt,and both came
                            to the sameconclusion;namelythat there had beena great deal of introduc-
                            tion of material, particularlyof potash. Dr. Darnley presentedhis paper at
                            the January and February, 1960, meetingsof the Institution of Mining and
                            Metallurgy, and Dr. Vaes took part in the discussionat a later meetingof
                            that organization. Hence, this informationwas availableat the time "The
                            Geologyof the Northern RhodesianCopperbelt"went to pressin 1961, and
                            deservedmore attention than the six lines it receivedon page 131.
                                In summary,Dr. Darnley concludedthat there was a progressionof large
                            scalemetasomatism,   which took placein the followingstages:
                                 1. Introduction of potashand boron, with formation of potashfeldspar
                                    and sericite, enlargementof original tourmalines and formation of
                                    new grains of that mineral. Some of the rockscarry 10% K•O and
                                    may becomean "ore" of potashfor fertilizer manufacture.
                                 2. Introductionof quartz.
                                 3. Introduction of ions which formed hematite, apatite, rutile, zircon and
                                    monazite,and the coppermineralizationwas about contemporaneous.
                                 4. Albitization and scapolitization,probablyconnectedwith the large scale
                                       basic intrusions.

                                It is unnecessary to remindstudentsof petrologyand of economicgeology,
                            that large scalesericitizationand albitizationhas gone on around many in-
                            trusions,involving the movementof millions of cubic yards of alkalies, and
                            leaving little or no evidenceof any channelwaysor openings.
                                Dr. Darnley is satisfied,ho•vever,that the copper mineralizationwas
                            pre-folding,and he relatesit to somevolcanicactivity,one exampleof which
                            is a peculiaralbite-biotite"sill" foundin drill holenumberedNE 6B at Ndola.
                            Ndola domeis just north of the Bwana Mkubwa mine.
                                Dr. Darnley alsofound evidenceof enrichmentin the ore of molybdenum
                            and of silver.
                               Apatite,rutile and tourmalineare, of course,commonaccessories in many
                            ore depositsof definiteigneoushydrothermalorigin. Tourmalineis a common
                            constituentof high temperaturevein deposits.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                         NORTHERN             RHODES'I.4.V COPPERBELT                                               389

                                 This writer (8) describedzircon as a contactmetamorphicmineral in
                            Idaho.
                               In his discussionof Dr. Darnley's paper, Dr. Vaes expressedcomplete
                            agreementwith his conclusionsthat there had beenlarge scaleintroductionof
                            material during the metamorphism.
                               Point &--Evidence from Katanga. The volume "The Geology of the
                            Northern Rhodesia Copperbelt" was written, as the name implies, to de-
                            scribethe depositsin Northern Rhodesia,and not the whole belt which con-
                            tinues northwestwardinto the Congo. Fortunately we have a fairly recent
                            descriptionof a part of that belt, by Oosterbosch(9). Dr. Schuilinghad
                            been expectedto cometo the United States in the Spring of 1960 to give a
                            series of lectures, but he was prevented from doing so by ill health. It
                            is to be hopedthat he can comeat a later time.
                                The copperand cobaltmineralsof Katanga occurin two dolomiticforma-
                            tions which correspondin age with what in Northern Rhodesiais calledthe
                            "Upper Roan" and hence the depositsare stratigraphicallyyounger and
                            higher than thosesouthof the internationalborder. The enclosingrocksare
                            called the Mine Series. These are siliceous dolomites, well stratified, and
                            form a tectonicallycompetentgroup. The group appearsbetweena complex
                            of more or less arenaceousdolomite, much contorted,called "argillo-talcose
                            rocks" (R.A.T.) and an upper series, called "Upper SandstoneRocks"
                            (R.G.S.).
                               The dolomitesshow no sign of derivationfrom limestones. All the car-
                            bonatesare exclusivelydolomites,and are in all probabilityof direct sedi-
                            mentary origin. At the Fungurume district, describedby Oosterbosch,the
                            copper minerals are chalcociteand bornite; chalcopyriteand pyrite are
                            practicallyabsent.
                                  In conclusion,Dr. Oosterbosch wrote:

                               It may be reasonedthat: (a) the absenceof mineralization in the breccia of
                            argillo-talcoserock, which appearsfavorable (for deposition); the uniformity of
                            mineralization•vhichseemto indicatea horizontalrather than a vertical deposition
                            of ore, and, to a less extent, the non-discoveryof accesschannels,seem to us to
                            be good reasonsto considerthe introductionof mineralizationas subsequent to the
                            breaking up the mine series into foliations, and
                               (b) In favor of the epigenetichypothesis,mineralizedformationsare favorable
                            formations (for such deposition)and the structureand texture of these layers
                            suggestthat there were in fact, at the beginning of deformation,the most favorable
                            of all of the beds in the lower part of the dolomitic shale series.

                                  In otherwords,the solutionswere introducedafter foldingand brecciation
                            started.
                               Thus,it is the pleaof this reviewerthat students
                                                                              of economic
                                                                                        geologywho
                            review"The Geologyof the NorthernRhodesianCopperbelt,"     read not only
                            what MessersMendelsohn    andGarlickhavewritten,but with an equallyopen
                            mind, studythe sectionswritten by Brock,McKinnonand Smit, Jordaanand
                            Pienaar,and alsothe writingsof Dr. Darnley (6), and especiallythe pages
                            of discussion(5, 7) that followedthe presentationof that paper; and also
                            read what is availableon the depositsin Katanga.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                            390                                          JOSEPH L. GILLSON

                              Otherwise,one'sconclusionmay be that of the blind man describedby
                            McKinnonand Smit who felt only of the tail of the elephant;or, following
                            anotherold proverb:"Be carefulof half truths,sinceyou may havehold of
                            the wrong half."
                                  DEPARTMENTOF GEOLOGYAND GEOPHYSICS,
                                    MASSACHUSETTS    INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY,
                                                                           CAMBRIDGE,
                                                                                    MASS.,
                                       June 20, 1962
                                                                                REFERENCES

                              1. Brummer,J. J., 1955, The geologyof the Roan AntelopeOrebody: Inst. Min. Met. Trans.,
                                     v. 64, p. 257-318, 458-472 and 581-590.
                             2. White, C. N., 1942, Origin of MansfeldCopperDeposits:Ecoa. G•oL., v. 37, p. 44-48.
                             3. Trask, Parker, 1925, Ore of Mansfeld Kupferschiefer,Germany: Ecoa. G•oL., v. 20,
                                     p. 750.
                             4. Bowie, S. H. V., 1960, Uranium and thorium in the Federation: Rhodesian Min. and
                                     Eng. Jour., v. 25, p. 37-38.
                              5. Davidson, C. F., 1960, in discussionof paper by A. G. Darnley: Inst. Min. Met. Trans.,
                                     v. 69, p. 543.
                              6. Darnley, A. G., 1960, Petrology of some Rhodesian Copperbelt orebodies and associated
                                     rocks: Inst. Min. Met. Trans., v. 69, p. 127-173, 371-398 and 540-569.
                             7. Vaes, J. F., Discussion of Dr. Darnley's paper: same p. 392.
                             8. Gillson, J. L., 1925, Zircon as a contact metamorphic mineral at Pend Oreille, Idaho:
                                     Am. Mineralogist, v. 10, p. 187-194.
                             9. Oosterbosch,R., 1951, Copper mineralization in the Fungurume region, Katanga: Ecoa.
                                  G•on., v. 46, p. 121-148.
                            10. Phillips, K. M., 1955, A regionaloutline of certain metalliferouszonesand their bearing
                                  uponthe problemof granitizationin Northern Rhodesia:C.C.T.A., Bull. 44, p. 119-132.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​58/​3/​375/​3481786/​375.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
