                                                                          DISCUSSION


                                   ORIGIN           OF THE            ROAN          ANTELOPE                 COPPER            DEPOSIT
                                                               OF     NORTHERN                  RHODESIA

                                Sir: In the September-October
                                                           issue(pp. 575-616) of EcoNoMICGEOL-
                           Oa¾there is a paper on the Roan Antelope Mine and referenceis made to an
                           earlier article by Garlick and Brummer. There have also appearedarticles
                           and discussions  on the genesisof the Northern Rhodesiancopperoresin the
                           Bulletin of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy. The authorshave ad-
                           vancedargumentsfor a sedimentaryorigin of the copperores. As I under-
                           standthe argumentit is as follows:The ancientschistswere intrudedby
                           graniteand mineralizationaccompanied    the closingphasesof the graniteintru-
                           sion. Weatheringand erosionfollowedand the sedimentsof the Mine Series
                           werelaid downin depressions    adjacentto the areasbeingeroded. The copper
                           mineralswere carrieddown and depositedat the sametime partly as a result
                          of biochemicalprocesses.
                             Foldingand metamorphism    followedthis depositionand the last eventwas
                          igneousactivityin the form of gabbrointrusions.
                               The authorsrepudiatethe earlier contentionthat there was a granite
                          whichcut the Mine Series. I was on the copperbelt for part of 1929 to 1931
                          and saw mostof the depositsin Northern Rhodesiaand the Haut Katanga.
                          I had the pleasureof driving Dr. Schneiderh6hn    from N'Dola to N'Kana and
                          on to N'Changa,soI hearda gooddealaboutsyngenetic         oresfrom him. My
                          own views at that time were definitelyon the side of thosewho postulatedan
                          epigeneticorigin,and thereweremanylively discussions     with Bancroft,Gray,
                          Davidson,Batemanand Grout, who all held that the oreswere epigenetic. I
                          shouldlike to pointout the difficultiesthat thosewho advocatethe sedimentary
                          hypothesiswill haveto explain.
                             First--Bancroft alwaysstressed   the importanceof dragfoldsas beingasso-
                          ciatedwith the ore zones. This association   seemedto be remarkablyexhibited
                          at N'Kana, N'Changa, Chambishi,and at the Roan Antelope. If theseores
                          are epigenetictheyare foundin thoseplacesexactlywherethey shouldbe.
                             For those who favor sedimentationit will be necessaryto explain this
                          strangefact, that the drag folds occurredwhere the ore had previouslybeen
                          deposited.
                             Secondly--There is no possibleway to explain the Kipushi Mine where
                          the ore occurs between the faulted ends of the Sgrie des Mines and the fault
                          plane, by an appeal to washed in sediments. I have still some of that re-
                          markable        ore in our museum.
                             The characterof the ore in the River lode at N'Changa in my opinionis
                          clearly epigeneticwhere veinletsof coppermineralsrun up alongthe shales
                                                                                        82




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​50/​1/​82/​3479696/​82.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                                               DISCUSSION                                                             83

                           and crossfrom one shalebed to another. The recentauthorsattemptto ex-
                           plainthis jumpingof the bedsby an appealto metamorphism.It is a difficult
                           task.
                              Thirdly--From polishedsectionsand from various placesunderground
                           which I saw, sometwenty years ago, replacementwas apparent.
                              Fourthly--The Mine Series consistsof sedimentsthat range from con-
                           glomeratesandarkosesat thebaseto shalesanddolomiticshalesat upperhori-
                           zons. The coppermineralsare foundin the shales. If the cupreousminerals
                           are derivedfrom a previousmineralizationby erosionand transport,it seems
                           very curiousthat thesemineralsare not with the coarsebasalsedimentsbut
                           are associated
                                        with the mudstoneson a higherhorizon. The grain sizesgiven
                           by Gratonin a reportin possession
                                                           of the Roan AntelopeMine are as follows:
                                                            Relatively few grains                        0.60 min.
                                                            Average grain                                0.06 min.
                                                            Very many as small as                        0.006 min.
                                                            Many as small as                             0.0025 ram.

                               If the averagegrain diameterof chalcocite
                                                                       is 0.06 mm. the averagegrain
                          of the detritalquartzassociatedwith it shouldbe 0.08 mm. In other words
                          the grain sizeof the sedimentsshouldbe largerthan that of the coppermin-
                          eralswhichis not the case. The averagegrain sizeof sediments   of the type
                           of the Roan Shales is 0.01 mm.
                              If the chalcocite
                                              or chalcopyrite
                                                            is the resultof sedimentaryprocessesthese
                          mineralsshouldhavebeenfoundin the conglomerates       or arkosesat the base
                          of the Mine Series. Thosewho favora sedimentary      originhavethereforeto
                          explainwhy they are in the mudstones   well abovethe basalbeds.
                              Fifthly--The statementthat all the graniteis olderthan the Mine Series
                          is opento dispute. In my opinionthe N'Changagraniteis younger. The
                          evidence  is two-fold:At the noseof the synclinethereis a tongueof granite
                          or pegmatitecutting into the beds.
                              In the footwallrocksof the longcrosscut   to the first shaftwhichwasput
                          downin 1930or 1931the felspathic    sandstones as I rememberthemshowpro-
                          gressivefelspathization,
                                                 i.e., granitizationas the graniteis approached.
                              Far beit frommeto discourage   ideas--buthypotheses    aretoolsnot creeds,
                          and thosewho advanceideasmustbe preparedto defendthem.
                              My testamentregardingthe copperbelt is thereforeas follows:The ores
                          are hypogeneandepigeneticandwereintroducedinto the sediments       after those
                          rockshadbeenmountainbuilt and intrudedby igneousrocks.
                              Tot hobninesquot sententiae.
                                                                                                                  G. VXB•2T DoU,r.AS
                               DALHOUSIEUNIVERSITY•
                                 HALIFAX• CANADA,
                                   Nov. 15, 1954




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​50/​1/​82/​3479696/​82.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
