                           EconomicGeology
                            Vol. 57, 1962, pp. 350-366




                                         BIOGENIC                  PRIMARY                   SULFIDE         OF THE        PERMIAN
                                                     KUPFERSCHIEFER                                   AND   MARL      SLATE

                                                                                        L. G. LOVE


                                                                                            CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                  PAGE

                           Abstract       ..............................................................                                            350
                           Introductionand previousresearch......................................                                                   350
                           Experimentalmethod ..................................................                                                    353
                           Descriptionof the sulfidemineralfraction ................................                                                353
                              Kupferschiefer .....................................................                                                  353
                              Marl slate .........................................................                                                  354
                           Microfossils released from the sulfide ....................................                                              354
                           Sulfide-organic
                                         matterrelationship in the spheres.........................                                                 357
                           Formationof the primarysulfide........................................                                                   359
                           Formationof secondarysulfide..........................................                                                   361
                           References ............................................................                                                  365

                                                                                            ABSTRACT


                                    The sulfide of the Kupferschiefer of Germany includes myriads of
                                  small spheresmostlyup to 20 t• in diameter. Theseare now shownto con-
                                  tain    and      be enclosed in delicate                         microfossil   remains   associated      with
                                  Pyritosphaera barbaria Love 1957, which has been recognizedin the
                                  pyrite microspheres of many dark shalerocksand somerecentsediments.
                                  The principal forms are regarded as the remains of micro-organismsthat
                                  causedthe authigenicprecipitationof the primary sulfidein the sediment
                                  of the foul-bottomedearly Zechsteinsea of Europe. Similar observations
                                  have been made from the Marl Slate of north east England, a contiguous
                                  depositof the same sea. This primary sulfide of the Kupferschieferhas
                                  been shownby studiesof other workers on pseudomorphism     to have been
                                  pyrite and not of mixed sulfidesincluding copperas postulatedby earlier
                                  syngeneticists. Demonstrationhere of its early formation allows consid-
                                  eration of early diagenetic replacementand the current theories of the
                                  origin of this secondarymineralization are discussedin this light.

                                                                                      INTRODUCTION


                           Ti•is paper arises from paleontologicalstudies of samplesof the Permian
                           Kupferschieferof Mansfeld, Germany, and the equivalent Marl Slate from
                           north eastEngland. It givesin particularan explanationof the origin of the
                           disseminatedsulfidespheresabundantlyoccurringin them and therebypro-
                           videsa contributionto the understandingof the metalliferousdepositsof these
                           rocks. The origin of the sphereshas already engagedthe attentionof many
                           writers without satisfactoryconclusionbut the approachand methodsde-
                           scribedin the presentwork give a new meansof resolvingthe problem.
                               The forms in which sulfidesof the Speise or disseminatedore of the
                                                                                                  350




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC PRIMARY SULFIDE                                                            351

                           Kupferschieferoccur,especiallythe microscopic
                                                                       grains,have beendescribed
                           by Schneiderh6hn (20, 21) for the Mansfelddepositsand by Neuhaus(15)
                           for those of the Kupfermergel of Lower Silesia. That the Marl Slate of
                           north eastEngland,briefly describedby Dunham (4, p. 262-3) in its setting
                           as an ore-bearingdeposit,and the Kupferschieferand the Kupfermergelare
                           equivalentis discussedby Deans (3, p. 344-347) who describedsimilarmin-
                           eralization there. Concerningthe form of the sulfide, the compositionof
                           whichwill be discussed later, Neuhaus'observations adequatelysum up those
                           of Schneiderh6hn  and coverthree groups.
                               (a) Most importantin the presentstudy are the Kieskii#elchen(15, p.
                           318, Fig. 5). These well known small spheres3 to 20 t• in diameter,are
                           composedof closelypacked sulfide particles each « to 3 t• in size. The
                           abundance  of thesespheresin the Kupferschieferis notable. Both Schneider-
                           h6hn (20, p. 14) and Schouten(22, p. 376) record10,000or moreper cu mm
                           of rock.
                                 (b) Anothercharacteristic
                                                       sulfide
                                                             formis thatof theKieskli•mpchen.
                                                                                           At
                           20 to 40 t• the sizeis greaterthan that of the Kiesldigelchenand the individual
                           grains,too, are coarser,generallyabout 3 to 8 • across. Neuhaus (15, p.
                           322) notestheir rarity in the Kupferschieferof Mansfeldand althoughthe
                           presentauthor has found the explanationof [heir form in other rocks (12),
                           theyhardlyenterinto the presentpaper.
                               (c) Individualcrystalsof the sizeand form of the grainsfrom which the
                           Kieskiigelchen   are built up are alsofound. Both Schneiderh6hn    (20, p. 15)
                           andNeuhaus(15, p. 322) refer to this as fine sulfide"dust"scatteredthrough-
                           out the bituminousgroundmassof the shale.
                               The early formationof sulfidespheres,at least of pyrite, in the history
                           of the Kupferschieferis acceptableto all authors. Schneiderh6hn(20, 21)
                           introducedthe conceptof vererzte Bakterien or mineralizedbacteriato ex-
                           plain their origin syngeneticwith depositionof the shale. As vererzteBak-
                           terien the sphereswere held to be the relics of sulfur bacteriawhosesulfur
                           had becomefixed by a mixture of metals,includingcopper,previouslyin
                           solutionin the sea water. The great abundanceof the spheresand their
                           regular shapewere significantfactorsin association     with the obviouslyfoul
                           bottom nature of the depositswhere sulfur bacteria would be expectedto
                           proliferate. To Schouten(9, 23) this theory was unacceptable,       one of the
                           groundsbeing the lack of resemblance       of the spheresto any known sulfur
                           bacteria. By detailedstudiesof pseudomorphism         (22) the pyrite spheres
                           were shownto be a phasegenerallyreplacedby other minerals-•copper,zinc
                           and leadsulfides--but,evenby inferencefrom studiesof the Mount Isa Shale
                           of Australia, Schoutenwas unable to disprove,conclusively,the primary
                           syngenetic
                                   originof the spheresas postulated
                                                                   by Schneiderh6hn.If indeed
                           they were primary then probablySchoutenwould have regardedthem as the
                           product of the crystallizationof small inorganicallyaccumulatedblobs of
                           sulfidegel,as did Barringer(Taylor, in 11, p. 438) andRust (19) for similar
                           formsfrom recognizedhypogeneore deposits.
                              By the broadrangeof rocksover which Schouten'sdiscussion    rangedit is
                           clear how widespreadin ore depositsis the occurrenceof sulfidespheres.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           352                                                  L. G. LO?E

                           Deans(3, p. 349-350) hasnotedthat pyrite spheresare no lesscommonin
                           various coals and shale and are to be regarded,in fact, as characteristicof
                           sapropelic rocks. His commenton their passiverole in the mineralizationof
                           the Kupferschiefer  in no way reducestheir importance,in their enormous
                           abundance,  as hoststo many ore mineralsfound as pseudomorphs        of the
                           spheresafter pyrite or marcasite.
                               To thisgeneralproblemit hasbeenrelevantto applythemethodsemployed
                           by the author on other rocks,a brief accountof which follows. Pyrite
                           spheres, of a sizeand type comparable  with thoseof the Kupferschiefer were
                           observedby the authorin shalesof the Lower Carboniferous    (Mississippian)
                           succession in Scotland. It was found possible(11) to isolatethesepyrite
                           spheres:removalof the pyrite from them by nitric acid left microfossilre-
                           mains of an organicmaterial,principallyas small spheres,which had been
                           containedwithin the pyrite spheres. Subsequent   work has confirmedthat in
                           other deposits,suchas the Lower JurassicShalesof England (12) the same
                           phenomenoncan be demonstratedwhile a clearer idea of the morphologyof
                           the micro-organisms  was obtained. It washeld that the consistentassociation
                           of theseorganismswith sulfideis due to their originalgenerationof hydrogen
                           sulfidein themudpossibly   in themannerof the sulfate-reducingbacteria. As
                           a result,actingalsoas the focusfor the inevitableprecipitationof iron from
                           solutionby the sulfide,they becameinfilledwith someform of iron sulfide,
                           perhapshydrated,which ultimatelycrystallizedas pyrite. No doubt iron
                           sulfidealsoformedelsewhereas minutecrystalsin the mud. The organisms
                           werethoughtto representpart, at least,of an organiclife cycleand perhaps
                           to be saprophyticin nature. Later studies,still continuing,suggesta sim-
                           pler interpretationof their morphology, moreconsistent with that of bacteria.
                           If indeedthe metabolismof the organismsis correctlyinterpreted,then it is
                           possiblethat they are representativesof the groupDesulfovibriodesulfuricans
                           Beijerinck (Kluyver and Van Niel). The long geologicalhistory of the
                           phenomenon    was demonstrated  by Love and Zimmerman(14) who showed
                           its prevalencein the Lower ProterozoicMount Isa black shale sediments
                           where, in fact, the organicform of sulfideaccountsfor enormousquantities
                           of primary pyrite spheresand indeedrepresentsa great sourceof pyrite
                           availablefor mobilizationinto massivedeposits.
                              In the presentstudy,the Kupferschieferspecimens     usedwere kindly re-
                           leasedfrom the collectionsof the University of Freiberg i. Breisgau (Depart-
                           ment of Geology),the Imperial Collegeof Science& Technologyand Royal
                           Schoolof Mines, London (Departmentof Mining Geology)and the author's
                           ownDepartmentof Geologyin the Universityof Sheffield. Carefullylocated
                           undergroundmaterialwas thus availablefrom the horizonsof the Shwarze-
                           berge,the Dachberge, the Kammschale andthe Grosseand FeineLette of the
                           Kupferschiefer(21, p. 143& Fig. 50). Specimens of Marl Slatefrom north
                           east Englandwere kindly madeavailable,throughthe AssistantDirector,
                           H. M. GeologicalSurveyOffice,Leeds,by the North EasternDivisionof the
                           NationalCoal Board of Great Britain. Accuratelylocalizedcoreswere used
                           from the followingborings:N.C.B. Durhamoff-shoreNo. 3; N.C.B. 5.
                           Mainsforth"D"; N.C.B. Ferryhill No. 2; Garmondsway
                                                                            "D."




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC PRIMARY SULFIDE                                                            353

                                                                      EXPERIMENTAL              METHOD


                               The methodsemployedhave been fully describedelsewhereby the
                           author (11, p. 461; 14, p. 883; 12) and needonly brief mentionhere.
                               The rockis crushedand carefullygroundand from it the fractionheavier
                           than Bromoform(s.g. 2.9 grn cc) is extractedby centrifugingin that liquid.
                           This fractionis predominantlycomposed     of sulfideminerals. If necessary,
                           residuallight mineralmaterialmay be removedby standingfor somedaysin
                           warmhydrofluoric  acid,butanyorganicmaterialadheringto thespheres     is not
                           thusremoved. The sulfidemineralsmay next be dissolved       by the actionof
                           warm concentratednitric acid and, from the resultingliquid, after careful
                           washingfree from acid, a suspension   of micro-organisms  releasedfrom the
                           sulfide may be concentratedby final centrifuging. Permanentmounts in
                           glycerineon microscope   slidesare then made. Alternatively,the processof
                           solutionof the sulfidefrom individualgrainsor smallclustersmay be ob-
                           servedthroughthe microscope      by usinga specialcell previouslydescribed
                            (14, p. 884). All this preparationis carriedout carefullyunder conditions
                           allowingfor the exclusionof all contamination,   with freshlydistilledwater
                           only beingusedthroughout.

                                                DESCRIPTION           OF    THE     SULFIDE        MINERAL          FRACTION


                              Kupferschiefer.--Samples  of the sulfideobtainedfrom the disaggregated
                           rockswere mountedon slidesfor microscopic      examinationby transmitted
                           light, while a smallnumberof polishedsectionsof the originalrockswere
                           madefor comparison.The latter methodis that usedby mostearlier ob-
                           servers. In the grainmounts,as wouldbe expected,  simplesphericalto oval,
                           4 to 15 t• spheres(Kiesk/igelchen)wereabundant. The surfaceof mostindi-
                           vidualspheresspeciallyexaminedat high magnification    and underreflected
                           light showedframboidaltexture,a characteristic   speckledappearance,   de-
                           scribedby Rust (1, p. 30-31). In polishedsections(Figs. 1, 2) this could
                           be seento occurinternallytoo,the spherebeingcomposed   throughout of large
                           numbersof individualsulfidecrystals,mostlyidiomorphic.Instanceswere
                           observed   wherein parta continuousmassof sulfideformedpartof thesphere
                           but whetherthe masswas of one homogenous      mineral was not determined.
                           Schouten    has shownthe possible rangeof secondary  structuresin massive
                           spheres
                                 fromthegrowthof sulfide
                                                       between
                                                             theprimarysulfide
                                                                             to thecomplete
                           replacementof the primary sulfide. Althoughoccasionalclusterswere seen
                           in the grain mounts,as in the polishedsections,
                                                                         no clear evidenceof actual
                           unionof adjacentspheres
                                                 wasseen,nor wereanybodiesclearlyseenresem-
                           bling the Kieskl/impchen
                                                 with their larger individualwell-spaced
                                                                                       sulfide
                           crystals,
                                   although
                                          someunusuallycoarseKiesldigelchen
                                                                          spheres werepresent.
                           The polishedsections also showedsomespheresof a muchlooserstructure
                           thanaverage,as if heldin theprocess
                                                             of breakingup. No suchbodieswere
                           foundin the loosegrainmountsbut probablythe proportionof very small
                           grainsof sulfidein the latterwasgreaterthanin the originalshale,dueto the
                           disintegrationof manyforms of sulfideduringgrinding. Small individual




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           354-                                                 L. G. LOVE

                           grainsof the size2 to «/• and smallerare scatteredthroughoutthe original
                           shaleas "dust." Besidesthe spheresand "dust," larger angulargrains of
                           sulfidewere abundantin the sulfideconcentrate.This materialundoubtedly
                           representsfragments of more massivesulfide to be seen in small lensesand
                           veinsin the originalrock but now randomlycrusheddown.
                              In the presentstudy no detaileddeterminations
                                                                          were made of the min-
                           eralogicalcomposition
                                               of the spheresand other sulfideswith respectto
                           particularmetals. As would be expected,copperand other metalsas well as
                           iron were takeninto solutionby the nitric acidusedto dissolvethe sulfide.
                              Althoughthe useof hydrofluoricacidservedwell to removeany clayand
                           othermineralsthat still remainedadheringto the sulfideafter centrifuging,
                           it became clear in the course of the work that removal of all the bituminous
                           material would seldombe possiblealthoughvery intensegrinding of the
                           original rock reducedits proportion. Careful study showedthat the sulfide
                           sphereswere firmly united with shredsand fragmentsand even quite large
                           piecesof organicbituminous  tissuefrom the shale,whichwerecarrieddownby
                           the sulfideinto the heavyfraction. Tails of suchmaterialcouldalsobe seen,
                           by transmittedlight, on somespheresand, occasionally,   very thin rims of
                           translucentmaterialalthoughthesewere not visibleby reflectedlight at the
                           upper surface. Someof the spheresappearedto be associated   with recogniz-
                           able sporeand pollenmaterialand carefulsearchrevealeda smallnumberof
                           Hystrichospheres  with grains of pyrite (not of Kieskiigelchentype) borne
                           internally. All these observationswill be discussedlater.
                               Marl Slate.--Qualitativelythe sulfideforms in the Marl Slate closely
                           resemblethoseof the Kupferschiefer, and spheresof Kieskiigelchentype, 5 to
                           15• in diameter,andapparently  all of pyrite,predominate
                                                                                  andin somespeci-
                           mensare nearly as abundantas in the Kupferschiefer. Somegrains of this
                           type, however,alsooccurin a multiglobularform up to 20 • or 30 • acrossas
                           if compounded from individualframboidalspheres. Evidenceis given below
                           that someof theseare in fact unified bodiesand not simply aggregatedby
                           chanceon mountingthe slideor by formingagainsteachother in the original
                           mud. Occasional Hystrichosphereswith granular pyritic contents were
                           also noted.


                                                      MICROFOSSILS           RELEASED         FROM      TIlE     SULFIDE


                               The bulk of the microfossils
                                                          revealedby solutionof the sulfidespheresand
                           multispheresshowthe featuresof, and are assignedto, the speciesPhyrito-
                           sphaerabarbariaLove 1957 and the forms recognizedas associated     with that
                           species(12) from Lias (Lower Jurassic) and Carboniferousstrata. Only
                           a little distinctioncan be made betweenthe preparationsobtainedfrom the
                           Marl Slate of north east England and from the Kupferschieferof Germany.
                               The isolatedsphericalbodies,where free of any outer sac showedthe
                           characteristicform of being composedof a closelypacked mass of small
                           translucentgrains « • in size or less giving a microspinoseto microgranular
                           surfaceappearance(Figs. 3, 9, 12). Weak birefringenceis shownby a few,
                           the restare isotropic. The birefringence is greatestimmediatelyafter clearing




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC           PRIMARY           SULFIDE                                        355




                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                   7




                               13,                                                                                                                15

                              Fits. 1-2. Sulfide spheres (Kieskfigelchen) in Mansfeld Kupferschiefer.
                           1. Upper surface. 2. Section. Reflectedlight, oil immersion,approx. X 2,500.
                              Fxcs. 3-7. Microfossilsreleasedfrom sulfide spheresof Mansfeld Kupfer-
                           schiefer. Transmittedlight, oil immersion,approx. X 2,500.
                              Fx6s. 8-15. Microfossilsreleasedfrom sulfidespheresof Marl Slate of north
                           east England. Transmittedlight, oil immersion,approx. X 2,500.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           356                                                  L. G. LOVE

                           the sulfidewith acid and decreaseswith longer contactwith the acid and
                           thereforeit may be due to someinitial productof the reaction,perhapsfree
                           sulfur.
                              The largestnumberof microfossilsfall in the morecomplexform of P. bar-
                           baria (12) wherein the microspjnose  body is encasedin a transparentto
                           translucentouter sac, the latter commonlyirregularlyattachedto or in-
                           corporatedin other tissuematerial (Figs. 6, 7). Forms with someincom-
                           plete remnantof the sacare common(Figs. 4, 8). As was found in Lower
                           Jurassicand Carboniferousrocks,insteadof the typical sphericalcore body,
                           in any of theseinstances,a smallermore irregular clusterof small granules
                           may be foundof materialof similarappearance. Alternatively,rather loosely
                           developed largeformsof the microgranular  to microspinose
                                                                                   corebodymay be
                           found. These were regardedas representinglevelsof developmentof the
                           core material.
                               Where the sphericalbodiesare associated     with large sheetsof organic
                           tissue(Fig. 5) they rest in what at first sightare closelyfitting circularpits
                           within its surface. In some cases,where the necessarilyvery delicate
                           observationcouldbe made, it has beenconfirmedthat the lining of the pit
                           continuesover the upper surfaceof the body within, as a thin transparent
                           skin. Many similarpits are seendevoidof corebodies,as mightbe expected
                           from the inevitablyroughtreatmentthe materialhas receivedduring prepara-
                           tion. When on the upper surfaceof the tissueunder examinationthe pits
                           appearto be completelyclosedon the lower side; but no empty pit with a
                           closedupper surfaceas well has been positivelyconfirmed. The organic
                           tissueinvolvedin this way is generallyquite devoidof any regular structure
                           or ornament to indicate its origin. Much of the abundant bituminous
                           organicdebrisin theserocksis in a stateof decomposition
                                                                                 beyondthat allowing
                           recognitionof its initial form. None the lesssomegenerallyroundedmasses,
                           with P. barbaria on them, show suggestionof having been spore or pollen
                           grains and some undoubtedsaccatepollen grains in the same state have
                           beenrecognized.
                              A few piecesof tissueshowa singleopenangulardepression      or groupof
                           depressions that are analogousto someidiomorphicform of sulfidecrystal.
                           Not appearingsimilarto the form originallydescribed asPyritella poly•Ionalis
                           (11, p. 434, & P1. 33, Figs. 6, 7; 12) no organicsignificance
                                                                                       is attachedto
                           them. It is probablethat the crystalpressedinto the soft organictissue,
                           perhapsduring its formation,and during the laboratorypreparationof the
                           materialthe crystalcarriedthe tissuedowninto the heavyfractionand subse-
                           quentlywas dissolvedout.
                               The forms describedabove, and attributed to P. barbaria, are common
                           to both the Kupferschieferand the Marl Slate. In the latter, two further
                           relatedforms of materialoccurbut only a few exampleshave beenseenfrom
                           the Kupferschiefer. In the Marl Slatesimplesphericalsacsare (Figs. 10, 13,
                           14, 15) releasedfrom the sulfide,of a sizeand form comparablewith those
                           that encasethe sphericalcorebodies. Some,observedvery closely,seemquite
                           unbrokenand althoughmost contain at least some small speckof material




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENICPRIMARY SULFIDE                                                             357

                           inside,thisis not a generalrule. In the Marl Slate,too,compound   bodies
                           occur,clearto rough-walled  cells,similarto the singleonesbut apparently
                           in the relationship
                                             of parentto bud (Figs. 13, 15). Many of thesetoo are
                           foundwith corematerialpresentfrom smalllooselygranularclusters(Fig.
                           15) to well developed sphericalmicrospinose or microgranular bodies(Fig.
                           11). The singleand compound     saccatebodiesresemble  thosefoundin the
                           samecircumstances   frompyritespheres  and multispheres of lowerJurassic
                           and Carboniferous age, and are to be includedunder the saccateforms as-
                           sociatedwith P. barbaria (12).
                             Currentstudyof recentsediments  that containabundantpyrite spheres
                           suggests
                                  that the body P. barbariarepresentsthe fossilizedremainsof a
                           saprophytic
                                    organism  that develops
                                                          randomlywithinappropriate  cavitiesin
                           decomposingplanttissues.The pyritethenappearsto form thererapidly.
                           This meansthat sac formationis not an activity in the life of the micro-
                           organism. This is discussed furtherby Love and Murray (13). The par-
                           ticularproblemraisedby the purelysaccate  formsremainsto be solved.
                               The few pyritizedHystrichospheres  principallyassignable
                                                                                      to the Michry-
                           stridia presentaspectsthat distinguishthem from the abovegroup. The
                           sulfidein them doesnot take the form of spheresand commonlyis as little
                           as one or two grainsin an otherwisenormal microfossil. On solutionthe
                           pyrite grains reveal individualsmall organic cells; althoughwhen in a
                           looseclusterthese resemblethe supposedearly stagesof P. barbariathey
                           nevertake up the full development of the spherecharacteristics
                                                                                        of the latter.
                           On thesegrounds,a distinctionfrom P. barbariais maintained;the materialis
                           more like that foundwithin pyrite of animaltestsof variousages (12). It
                           will be the subjectof communication  elsewhere.

                                          SULFIDE-ORGANIC              MATTER         RELATIONSHIP            IN    THE     SPHERES


                               Somecommentmustnowbe madeon the physicalrelationshipof the sulfide
                           to the rangeof organicstructuresrecordedas associated
                                                                               with Pyritosphaera
                           barbaria. Little can be added,however,to earlier discussions
                                                                                      becausewith the
                           equipmentand experience availableit hasnot beenfoundpossible   to prepare
                           polishedsectionsclearlyshowingthe relationshipof sulfideto organictissue,
                           either aroundthe whole 5 to 15 t• sphereor aroundthe boundariesof the
                           individualsmallgrainswhoselight reflectingqualityis very high. This lack,
                           however,is relievedby the resultsof examiningmountsof separatedspheres
                           and of watchingthe solutionof individualspheres.
                              In the first place,thereappearsto be somejustificationin regardingthe
                           form of P. barbaria (the microspinoseto microgranularcore body) as being
                           composed  of manycellsof organictissue,eachone of whichis tightly filled
                           with an individualcrystalof sulfide. At leastin the c•ase
                                                                                   of pyritethis is
                           in the form of an octohedronor cube. During solution,the positionof each
                           crystal is left as the positionof one small cell. The cells normally remain
                           tightly unitedand they do not fall apart in this process. The outer members
                           governthe externalsurfacetexture and very closeexaminationcan in some
                           instancesrevealthe latter to be composedof the outward pointinganglesof




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           358                                                  L. G. LOVE

                           crystal-shapedchambers, but this detailis normallyseenin a generalized way
                           overthewholesphere. The organicwall to eachsuch« to 2 t• cellis extremely
                           thin and has not beenobservedin a polishedsection. The latter doeshow-
                           everrevealwhatis fairly obviousfrom the solutionstudy,that the regulargrain
                           structure,and so presumablythe cell structure,generallycontinuesright
                           throughthe sphere. This is alsoto be observedin both Schneiderh6hn's
                           and Schouten's  photographs.
                               The presenceof an outer sac,oftenprovedduring solutionand sometimes
                           detectedon solid isolatedsulfidespheres,doesnot obscurethe framboidalap-
                           pearanceof the Kieskfigelchen, and this is in keepingwith its almostcomplete
                           transparencyafter the sulfidehas been removed,when it is frequentlyonly
                           detectablebecauseit givesthe apparentlygranularto microspinose     core body
                           a smoothequatorialoutline. Possibly,too, it is initally thinner than after
                           attack by nitric acid during which it might swell. In a simple spherethere
                           may well be no pyrite externalto this thin membrancefor in many regular
                           sulfidespheresno actualcontractionaccompanies     the early stagesof watched
                           solutionbefore the thin skin becomesapparentdue to the solutionof sulfide
                           within it. The sachasbeendetectedon a numberof isolatedspheresobserved
                           at high magnificationin transmittedlight, but would generally tend to be
                           obscuredby the bright refraction ring around the black sphere. In many
                           casestrailing organictissuecanbe seen,of the kind shownin Figures4 and 6.
                           In the caseswheresolutionimmediatelyproducesa recognizable       microspinose
                           to microgranular?. barbaria,it is possiblethat in grindingthe outer sachas
                           beenstrippedfrom the sphere. On the other hand, (with the exceptionof
                           the Hystrichospheres   previouslydescribed)even when a sphereturns out
                           to be a saccontaininga smallgranularcore body, only partially filling it, it
                           doesnonethe lessgenerallyseemto havebeenfull of sulfide. This can be seen
                           to dissolveaway leavinga hollowcavity besidewhatevercore bodythere may
                           be. This appliesalsoto the multi-saccate    bodies. This findingis borneout
                           by polishedsurfacestudies,which do not reveal a classof grain internally
                           hollow. If the specimens  seenwithoutany corematerialare truly undamaged
                           and did not loseorganiccontentduring solution,then their relationshipwith
                           sulfidepresentsan unsolvedproblem. It is not held that all spheresin these
                           preparationswere restrictedto the size of their sac for it is not difficult to
                           envisagefurther sulfidebeingprecipitatedexternallyand crystallizingon the
                           outer side; certainlyevidenceof extra sulfidehas beenseenduring solution.
                               It hasbeenbornein mind,duringthe observations,      that manyspheresof
                           sulfideas now seenare the productsof oneor morestagesin a progression       of
                           replacementsof one sulfide mineral by another. The questionnaturally
                           arises, given the organism-sulfiderelationshipssuggestedabove, of what
                           effectthere is likely to be on this when one sulfideis replacedby another
                           under the conditionsaccompanyingsuch metasomatism. Often evidenceof
                           t.he nature of a systemcan be deducedfrom the way the systemreacts to
                           externalinfluences.Little, though,is derivedfrom studyof the reportsby
                           Schoutenand othersthat during replacementsomedifferentiationmay occur
                           betweencoreand rim and that new sulfidemay enter interstitiallybetweenthe
                           grainsin a sphere. Two factorspreventedthis and other replacement        data




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC PRIMARY SULFIDE                                                            359

                          frombeingof use,for it wasneitherpossible to knowthe precisemineralogical
                          compositionof a spherewhose solutionwas about to be watchednor to
                          segregatebatchesof spheresof a uniform composition.The organictissue
                          of those isolatedsphereswhosesolutionhas been watchedhas not shown
                          disruptionas if due to earlier replacement
                                                                   of sulfidebut indeednone might
                          be expectedfor replacement   would occurparticleby particlethroughwhat
                          is clearly a permeablestructure. As noted earlier, however,in polished
                          sectionsof rock, somelooseclustersof sulfidegrainscouldbe seethat might
                          have been interpretedas being Kieskfigelchenspheresfalling apart. Such
                          grains have been figured by Schouten(22, Fig. 80). In this case, the
                           masseswould not remain as completesphereson disaggregationof the rock
                           to give a sulfide concentrate. There is no knowing, indeed, the number of
                           Kieskfigelchenthat simply remained as scatteredunit crystals after this
                           process,and furtherhow manydid so as a resultof changesduring geological
                           processes. Certainlysomesuchminutegrainsdid yield a tiny cell of organic
                           tissueon solutionwhile manyothersdid not.

                                                          FORMATION           OF    THE     PRIMARY         SULFIDE


                               Syngeneticorigin of the sulfidesphereswas prominentlyexpounded      by
                           Schneiderh6hn(20, 21) who regardedthem as having formed from blobs
                           of the mixed gels of iron, copperand other sulfidesall producedcontem-
                           poraneouslyon the sea floor. The spheres representedsulfur bacteria
                           mineralizedwith sulfideores,and the pointsor crystalsin the sphereswere
                           individuallymineralizedsulfur granulesin the bacteria. Schouten,however,
                           demonstratedthe evidence for the primary sulfide compositionof the
                           Kiesldigelchenhavingbeenthat of pyritewith subsequent  replacement,in which
                           "chalcocite,bornite,chalcopyriteand, less commonly,galenaand sphalerite
                           are found as pseudomorphs   after the originalpyrite crystals"(22, p. 377).
                           In generalthe replacement  was regardedas havingbeenby the locallypre-
                           dominantmineral at the relevantstageof metasomatism. Part of the evidence
                           for the replacementslies in the commonpreservationof the individualgrain
                           formationcharacteristicof the pyrite spheres,or alternatively,the structure
                           may appearto havebeenlost in the coreof the sphere,with the outer parts
                           stillshowing theoriginalstructure. Siegl(25) regarded  pyriteastheprimary
                           sulfidein the spheres(although itself replacive,see below), while Neuhaus
                            (15), havingthe sameopinionfor bothKiesldigelchen
                                                                           andKiesklfimpchen,
                           notedthat other sulfidesmightfill the interstices
                                                                           of the pyrite grainsbefore
                           replacingthe pyrite.
                                 Schouten(23, p. 529), admitted"that the arguments
                                                                                 for a syngenetic
                           depositionof FeS2, with the aid of sulphatereducingbacteria,dominate"but
                            remained unconvinced of the existence of fossil sulfur bacteria.                                              Also un-
                           convincedthat the iron sulfide,as the spheres,was syngenetiche elsewhere
                           suggests
                                 (22, p. 377) thatthepyritespheres
                                                                 mighthavearisenfromreplace-
                            ment of carbonateby iron sulfide. "In the coppershalea most remarkable
                            conformityexistsbetweenthe great variety of shapes,dimensionsand mode
                            of distributionof carbonateand sulphidebodies. From this it follows that




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           36O                                                  L. G. LOVE

                           pseudomorphism     of carbonateby sulphidemay be presumed." While this
                           refers mainly to lensesand irregularly shapedgrains, an instanceis cited
                           (op. cit. p. 379) from the Kupferschiefershaleof "accumulations of smaller
                           carbonategrainsapproaching    moreor lessglobularforms"with sulfidegrains
                           of similar form adjacent. In the casecited, however,the sulfide is bornite
                           andgalenaandtheframboidalform doesnot appearto be present. A similar
                           pointis raisedby Siegl (25, p. 350-51) who findsthe carbonategroundmass
                           presentin someof the rocksin questionhere to be formedof smallgrains
                           comparable   in sizewith the Kieskfigelchen,
                                                                      and regardsthe latter as having
                           beenformedby pyritizationof the former. No detaileddescriptionof the
                           calcitegrainswasgiven. Siegl'sdiscussion is referredto by Deans(3, p. 350),
                              Relevantto this discussion  is an exampleconsideredby Rayner (6, p.
                           202-3) in a description
                                                 of a shellylimestone from the CoalMeasuresof Eng-
                           land. In this shefindsminutespheresof carbonate,     probablyankerite,and
                           limohire,and alsopyrite; and the association   is .comparedwith that noted
                           aboveby Siegl. In the caseof theEnglishshellylimestone    the presentauthor
                           was,by the kindness  of Dr. Rayher,permittedto examinea sampleof the
                           rockandits thin sections.Withoutdoubtthepyritespheres       wereframboidal
                           andon separation andchemical  treatmenttheyyieldedthe rangeof organisms
                           described by Love (12), and identicalwith thosedescribed      in the present
                           paper. On the other hand, the granular carbonateand limonite,free of
                           pyrite, were demonstrated to containno suchorganicmatter. They were
                           completely solublein hydrochloric acidexceptfor a smallamountof mineral
                           material,probablyclays. In this casethen, there can be no possibilityof
                           conversion of the carbonateinto pyrite spheresas it would be necessary   to
                           introducethe forms of P. barbaria as well as the pyrite. Furthermore, at
                           veryhighmagnificationtherewaslittlesimilaritybetweenthesmall4 to 14v
                           sub-angulargrainsof calcite,eacha single-crystal
                                                                         grain,andthe framboidal
                           Kiesldigelchen
                                        of thesamegeneralsizebutwiththeirownverycharacteristic
                           regularform. In the work on the Kupferschiefer described
                                                                                  in the present
                           paper,it wasnotfoundthatcalcitegrainsof thissizeare common    in thin
                           sections,and furthermoreit was not found possibleto obtain the micro-
                           organisms
                                   described
                                          by useof coldor warmdilutehydrochloric
                                                                             acidon the
                           rock. This means that none of those bodies were included either in calcite
                           or othercarbonate  grains. Indeed,followingthe instruction    of Schouten
                           (22,p. 376) "Asanaxiomatic   principle
                                                                it maybesaidthattheinternal    struc-
                           tureof thehostgoverns   thefinalresult"it is difficult
                                                                               to understandhowthe
                           framboidal textureof thepyriteKiigelchen,   sotenaciouslyretained through
                           all butthelaststagesof replacement,should  itselfhavearisenfromdiagenetic
                           replacement of rathervagueandsimplecalcitegrains.
                                 We return then to the dominatingconclusionreachedby $choutenof
                           pyritehaving
                                      beentheprimary
                                                   mineral
                                                         in thespheres,
                                                                     withtheaddedknowl-
                           edgeof theparticular
                                             micro-organisms
                                                          occurring
                                                                  withinthemto emphasize
                           their syngenetic
                                          origin.
                                 In the senseusedby earlierauthorson the Kupferschiefer
                                                                                     problem,the
                           pyritesphereswouldhavebeentermedsyngenetic,in contrastto an epi-
                           genetic
                                 originfromhydrothermal
                                                     solutions
                                                            afterlithification
                                                                            of thesediment.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC PRIMARY SULFIDE                                                            361

                          More strictly, however,within the sequenceof formationof the sedimentit
                          is clearthat muchof the pyrite wasnot presentuntil after finely comminuted
                          plant debrisand the clay matrix had been depositedas a mud rich in iron.
                          As part of the earliest processof diagenesis,authigenicgrowth of sulfide
                          mineral then occurredfrom iron and, presumably,sulfate-sulfurfrom that
                          part of the water enclosedwithin the mud. Until a point was reachedsuch
                          that the systembecameclosedin any part of the mud then the formationof
                          iron sulfidethere would continueas long as sulfate was availablefrom the
                          overlyingwater and iron from the samesourceor from adsorptioncomplexes
                           with organicmatteralreadyin the sediment. Indeedthe distinctionbetween
                           syngeneticandearlydiageneticis noteasyto draw,andit is perhapsallowable
                           to continueusingthe term syngenetichere for the primarysulfidein simple
                           distinction
                                     frommuchlaterdiagenetic or epigenetic
                                                                         formationof the secondary
                           sulfide.

                                                        FORMATION           OF    THE     SECONDARY           SULFIDE


                              At some time subsequentto the formation of the iron sulfide in the
                           spheresand elsewherescatteredthroughoutthe sediment,there was an influx
                           of copper,lead, zinc and othermetalsto replacethe iron. In the literature,
                           the formationof the oresof thesemetals,whethersyngeneticor epigeneticis
                           inextricablyboundup with the origin of the iron sulfide. Indeedit is not
                           possibleto discuss
                                            the relationship
                                                           betweentheseprimaryand secondary    sul-
                           fide mineralswithout bringing in wider issuesof ore genesisas a whole in
                           the Kupferschieferandelsewhere.
                               In generalsomecasesof mineralizationappear to accompanydark shale
                           sedimentsand their particular sedimentaryenvironmentin a manner that
                           makestheir origin in them,if due to epigenetichydrothermalactivity,difficult
                           to understand. At the sametime, and the Kupferschieferis typical of this
                           with regardto the provenance  of the metals,it is equallydifficultto reconcile
                           thegreatamountsof metalinvolvedwith anybut an originalmagmaticsource.
                           Againthe regularconcentration  of the oresin termsof areais a factortending
                           to invokethisformof origin. AlthoughasDeans(3, p. 347) pointsout,the
                           Kupferschiefer  typeof mineralization
                                                               canbe recognized   in northeastEngland,
                           it is in CentralGermanythat copper,zinc,andleadare mostabundant.
                                In their paleogeographicsetting,the Kupferschiefer  and the Marl Slate
                           werethe first fine deposits
                                                     in the Lower Zechsteinseaafter the strongtrans-
                           gression  thatterminatedthecontinental Rotliegende  period. This submerged
                           an area from the north east of England acrossGermanyto Russia,and as
                           shownby Gregory(8, p. 22-3) the Kupferschiefer       itselfformedin an area
                           receiving  drainagefromtheHarz, theErzegebirge     andtheThuringerwald,   all
                           uplandswellknownfor theirearliermineralization.Gregoryconcluded          that
                           a seriesof lagoons mightbeenvisaged   marginalto themainZechstein     seaand
                           perhapspartiallyenclosedfrom it. The mostthoroughstudyof the condi-
                           tionsof deposition
                                            of theKupferschiefer
                                                               thereis dueto Pompeckj (17), sum-
                           marizedin Englishby Schuchert (24). The firstdepositin theselagoonsof
                           the wholeZechsteinsuccession
                                                      wasthe Kupferschiefer.The latter authorin




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           362                                                  L. G. LOVE

                           comment,upholdsPompeckj'sconclusions      that the Kupferschieferwas formed
                           in a foul-bottomedseaareawith upperoxygenatedwatersaboundingin plank-
                           ton and in drifting plant material, the latter often yielding excellentfossils
                           and beingindicativeof nearnessto land from whichonly the finestterrigenous
                           sedimentwas being washed. All this, on sinking to the bottom, gave the
                           sourceof the rich bituminouscontent(6-20•) of the fine graineddark mud
                           in processof becomingthe Kupferschiefer.Althoughmuch of the fine-
                           grainedbitumenis now unrecognizable, it is not entirelystructureless
                                                                                              for, in
                           suitablemicro-preparations,
                                                     abundantplanktonand plant materialcan be
                           recognized.The Kupferschiefer differedfrom later Zechsteindeposits   also
                           in that brachiopodand molluscanlife was very sparseand few scavengers
                           were present. Only one speciesof fish is common,Palaeoniscus  frieslebeni;
                           mostof the otherswere regardedby Pompeckjas havingbeenwashedin from
                           rivers rather than having been indigenousto the area of deposition. In
                           generalthe majorityof life was regardedas havingoccurredin the well
                           aeratedupperwatersandalthoughsomebottomfeedingtookplace,abundant
                           bottomlife wasnotpossiblebecauseof the lackof oxygen. The depthof the
                           Kupferschiefer
                                        seawasregarded by Schuchert  asnotexceeding600feet,much
                           lessthan that of the Black Sea, but not lessthan 300 feet, the lower limit of
                           aerationby stormwaves. The Kupferschiefer    depositsshowno periodic
                           change to aerated
                                           conditions,
                                                     noranydisturbance of theirfinelamination.
                              Explanationof manyof the extensive and commonly  thickseriesof dark
                           shalein thegeological
                                               columnin termsof conditionsknownat thepresenthas
                           alwaysbeendifficult. Persistency
                                                          of stagnation,
                                                                       however,is partlyexplained
                           by the concept of the barredbasin(29) with circulation of watergreatly
                           restricted. Indeed if the bar does not reach to the surface then denser saline
                           waterenteringfromtheopenseaandforminga heavierunderlayer
                                                                                  maysetup
                           an extra resistanceto thermal convection. Strgm's studies (27) on Nor-
                           wegianfjordsshowthe feasibility
                                                         of reducing
                                                                   conditions
                                                                           havingbeenmain-
                           tained unbrokenat least for many centuries. However, nowhereat the
                           present time,except in theparticularly
                                                               deepBlackSea,dowefindthegreat
                           areasof persistentstagnancy thatmusthaveoccurred in theearlyZechstein
                           sea,or in theLiassealatercovering muchthesameareaof Europe. The rec-
                           ognition of thecontinuationof theKupferschiefer
                                                                        seaintoNorthern England
                           indeed suggests thata verylargemarginalseaarearatherthansmalllagoons
                           musthave beenthe case. FollowingStrgm, however,it may be suggested
                           thatpresent
                                    dayoceans
                                            aregeologically
                                                        abnormal
                                                              in theirextensive
                                                                             under-
                           flows of cold aeratedwaters from polar sources.Both a differentpolar
                           climateand the Mediterraneansituationof the Tethyan sea, of which the
                           Kupferschiefer
                                     andLiasdarkshaleareasweremarginal,
                                                                     mayhavebeen
                           factors
                                 in favoring
                                           thepersistent
                                                      stagnancy
                                                             evidenced
                                                                    bythesedeposits.
                                 In this environmentit is now necessary
                                                                      to considerthe role of the micro-
                           organisms
                                  described
                                         in thispaperin relation
                                                               to earlierideasontheformation
                           of thesulfideof thespheres,
                                                     andon theprovenance of themetalsthemselves.
                           There are the contrastingviews,alreadymentioned,of Schneiderh6hn  in
                           favorof simultaneous precipitation
                                                            of iron, copper,leadand zincsulfides,
                           andofSchouten
                                      emphasizing
                                              thesequences
                                                       ofmetasomatic
                                                                replacement
                                                                        ofiron




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                               BIOGENIC PRIMARY SULFIDE                                                            363

                           sulfidein the spheresby epigenetic  solutionsof copper,lead and zinc. The
                           timingof the latter,however,hasbeenquestioned      by Deans(3, p. 350) who
                           suggested  on the balanceof evidencethat the replacementwasdiageneticrather
                           than epigenetic. The fact that the primary sulfidewas pyrite, even if later
                           pseudomorphed    by the others,is not detrimentalto the diageneticinterpreta-
                           tion for it hasbeenshownby Love and Murray (13) how earlythis mineral
                           can appearin foetid sediment.
                              Two theorieshave been employedby earlier writers to accountfor the
                           sourceof all thesemetalsfor syngeneticdepositionin the Kupferschiefersea.

                                 1. Leachingfrom pre-existinghumussoilsor crustsof dried-upplaya
                                    deposits. Thesemay have beenof long standing,themselvesenriched
                                    by the actionof percolatingwaterson metalliferousrocksbeneath.
                                 2. Direct weatheringfrom depositsassociated with oresor eruptiverocks,
                                    perhapshavingoccurredover a long periodof time with the accumu-
                                    lated solutionslying as deep groundwatersbefore rising again, in a
                                    periodof greaterrainfall to enrichthe Kupferschiefersea.

                               In the caseof transportby land drainagefrom suchsourcesinto the sea,
                           a mixed load of metalsmust be considered. Richter (18) from the resulting
                           regulardistributionof metalsin the water, suggested
                                                                             that varyingwater con-
                           ditionswould controldepositionof the metalscopper,lead and zinc. They
                           would be precipitatedin this order in the most sulfurouswaters but in
                           fresher streamscoppermight remain in solutionwhile zinc precipitatedas
                           carbonateor hydroxide. If the chemicalenvironmentin the immediatelocality
                           changed,then this metal might becomeavailablefor diageneticreplacement.
                           Richter did not discussthe formationof iron. Deans,however,(3, p. 350)
                           considering the verticalsequence of stratanotedthat the abundance   of copper,
                           lead and zinc is what, in terms of potentialseriesand generalorder of solu-
                           bility, mightresultfrom processes  of sedimentary   deposition.He suggested
                           it was an early phaseof the later established  succession of salt precipitation
                           in the Zechsteincontrolledby concentration.Yet with the metalspresent
                           togetherafterentryfrom a commonsourceit is difficulton theoreticalgrounds
                           to explainthe selectivedeposition of iron as sulfideleavingthe residualmetals
                           to be concentrated.Despitethe conditionsof restrictedcirculationpresent,
                           it is not considered probablethat, followingGoldberg(7, p. 258-9), falling
                           microplankton  and otherfossilremainswouldplay a significantpart in con-
                           centratingthe morecommonmetals,particularlyiron, in the sediment.
                               Lookingmore closelyat the normalstateof thesemetalsit may be noted
                           that Hutchinson(10, p. 708 et seq.& p. 811) emphasizes    the very smallcon-
                           centrationsof free ionsof iron, copperand othermetalsnormallyfoundin the
                           water and sedimentsof rivers and lakes,for most of thesemetalsare present
                           in non-ionicassociationwith colloidalmaterial both organic and inorganic.
                           The latter is commonlyclayand ferric hydroxide. In this statethen they are
                           carried into the sea and the more readily precipitatedon encountering     the
                           salinewater. Specialconditions    hold,however,in the hypolimnionof stag-
                           nantlakesand,presumably,
                                                 marinewaters. Here,wheretheoxygencontent




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           364                                                   L. G. LOVE

                           hasfallento very low levels(10, p. 716-720and Fig. 215) a considerable
                           amountof ferrousiron may be foundin solution. It appearsto be drawn
                           into an ionic state,simpleor complex,from adsorbed,non-ioniciron in the
                           sediment;and this processwouldcontinue,to balancean equilibrium,as iron
                           sulfideis precipitated. Hutchinson(10, p. 762) demonstrates   the virtual
                           indetectabilityof copperas simpleionsin the presence
                                                                              of ferroussulfideonce
                           the latter is present. Consideringthe effect of excessiveconcentrationof
                           iron on the equilibria(and, althoughseldommentioned,   iron is predominant
                           amongthe metalsof the Kupferschiefer)he shows(10, p. 762) that in the
                           presence of ferroussulfide"no limnologically
                                                                     possible concentration  of ferrous
                           iron could,by decreasing the concentration
                                                                    of the sulfideion, ever permit the
                           presenceof analyticallydetectableamountsof copper,"and only a slightly
                           greater extent of lead and zinc, in solution. NeverthelessHutchinson notes
                           from equilibriumdata that beneaththis limit, and probablywell belowa toxic
                           concentration  of copperion in the water, transfersof copperfrom the adsorbed
                           non-ionicconditionto replaceiron in ferroussulfidewouldproceedsteadily.
                           Somemobilityperhapsoccursalsoin complexform with an aminocompound
                           (op. cit., p. 815).
                              With a differentstartingpoint of a directlysubmerged      Rasenkupferstein
                           oxide crust, postulatedby someauthors,again reducingconditionsin the
                           bottomwatersmight allow preferentialleachingof iron, to be redepositedas
                           sulfidebeforeits replacementmore slowlyby other metalsenteringinto this
                           more stablephase. Considerationfor the first time for the Kupferschiefer,
                           however,of traceelementswhichare regardedas characteristic     of ancientsoils
                           and sapropelsled Deans (3, p. 350) to allow the possibilityof ancientsoilsas
                           a sourceof metals. But in the light of more recentlyelaboratedtheoriesit
                           may be possibleto go further than Deansin suggesting      more than a single
                           sourcefor the major mineralspresent,to give a more satisfactoryexplanation
                           of the differentiation             of the metals in the formation                    of the sulfides.
                               Iron is normally an importantconstituentof water rich in humic con-
                           stituentsand, mostlyprecipitatedas sulfideas a result of biologicalsulfide
                           reaction,iron is also normallyabundantin the dark foetid mudsof stagnant
                           basinsrich in organicmatter. But with regard to other heavymineralsin
                           the KupferschieferDunham (5, p. 288) points out that the suite is "not
                           normallyformedin quantityevenin a highlyevaporative    lagoon." For this
                           reasonin the caseof the Zechsteinsea he envisagesthe iron as having been
                           broughtinto the stagnantwatersby rivers rich in humicand plant material,
                           andiron sulfideas formingundermicrobiologicalinfluencein the bottommud;
                           then"springsconnected   with thehydrothermal
                                                                      mineralisation thenin progress
                           in the Harz, the Thuringerwald,the EnglishPenninesand possiblyelsewhere
                           brokethroughinto the Lagoondischarging     a large volumeof mineralised
                           waters left over after producingextensiveepigeneticdepositsin those dis-
                           tricts." "The metalswere depositedeither bacteriallyor by reactionwith
                           iron sulphidealreadypresent." From consideration of the replacement series
                          alreadydiscussed,of thesetwo possibilities,
                                                                   replacementof pre-existingiron
                          sulfidewasthe principalreactionthat occurred. With regardto the time of
                          thisreactionDunhamrefersto Westoll'sevidence(28; 3, p. 351) that copper




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                                BlOGENIC PRIMARY                     SULFIDE                                       365

                           and other metals entered into the head structures of certain fossil fishes in the
                           Marl Slateof NorthernEnglandearlyin thedecayprocess
                                                                             beforetheirdelicate
                           structurecould be crushedbeneaththe accumulatingsediment. Davidson,
                           however (2), rejectingmodern "syngenetic"hypotheseson the origin of
                           strata-boundpolymetallicdeposits,suggeststhat the fish structuresmight
                           earlierhavebeenrepresented  by pyrite of whichthe iron was later replaced
                           by othermetals. There appearsto be no publishedevidenceon this point.
                           Dunhameven suggests   that a masskilling of fishesmay have occurredin
                           connection with the emission of the mineralized waters.                                        None the less it is
                           probablethat the metalswouldhavebeenvery rapidlyabsorbed      non-ionically
                           within the sediment,and the possibilityof prolongedtoxicityhasalreadybeen
                           dismissed.It remainsto bestatedwhethertheemission     wasrelativelysudden
                           or a prolongedseepage. There seemto be no horizonsof the Kupferschiefer
                           richestin all metalsas if representing
                                                                the maximumoutburst,and explanation
                           is requiredof the trendsof both verticaland horizontaldistributionof the ore
                           metalssuchas notedby Deans (3, Figs. 85, 86) even if somesubsequent
                           transporthas occurredalong Rfickenand into over and underlyingstrata.
                           Oftedahl(16, p. 17) hassuggested   that the submarine exhalations may have
                           been gases,associated  with magmaticactivity. This would be difficultto
                           demonstrate, but the associations recognizedin someinstancesby Stanton
                           (26, p. 24) between submarineextrusive rocks and the accumulationof
                           sulfideore is certainlynot applicableto the caseof the Kupferschiefer,for
                           no suchvolcanicrocksare knownfor thisperiodalthoughlavasand tuffs occur
                           in the underlyingRotliegende.
                                 DEPARTMENT  OF GEOLOGY,
                                                      SHEFFIELD,ENGLAND,
                                   & YALE UNIVERSITY,NEW HAVEN, CONN.,
                                     Dec. 4, 1961

                                                                               REFERENCES

                            1. Bastin, E. S., 1950, Interpretation of ore textures: Geol. Soc. America Mem., v. 45.
                            2. Davidson, C. F., 1962, On the origin of some strata-boundsulfide ore deposits. Dis-
                                    cussion: Ecoa. GEO•.., v. 57, p. 265-273.
                            3. Deans, T., 1948, The Kupferschiefer and the associated lead-zinc mineralisation in the
                                    Permianof Silesia,Germanyand England: Rept. 18th Intl. Geol. Cons., Gr. Britain,
                                    1948.     Pt. vii, p. 340-352.
                            4. Dunham, K. C., 1960, Syngenetic and Diagenetie Mineralisation in Yorkshire: Yorks.
                                   Geol. Soe. Proc., v. 32, p. 229-284.
                            5. --,   1961, Black shale, oil and sulfide ore: Adv. Sci., v. 18, No. 73, p. 284-299.
                            6. Eagar, R. M. C., and Raynet, D., 1952, A non-marine shelly limestone and other faunal
                                    horizonsfrom the Coal Measuresnear Wakefield: Leeds Geol. Assoc.Trans., v. 6,
                                    p. 188-209.
                            7. Goldberg,E. D., 1954, Marine geochemistry.1. Chemicalscavengers
                                                                                             of the sea: Jour.
                                    Geology, v. 62, p. 249-265.
                            8. Gregory, J. W., 1930, The Copper-Shale(Kupferschiefer) of Mansfeld: Inst. Min. Met.
                                    Trans., v. 40, p. 1-55.
                            9. Grondijs,H. F., and Schouten,C., 1937, A studyof Mount Isa ores: EcoN. Gv.oi.., v. 32,
                                    p. 407-450.
                           10. Hutchinson,G. E., 1957, A Treatise on Limnology: v. 1, John Wiley & Sons,New York.
                           11. Love, L. G., 1957, Micro-organismsand the presenceof syngenetiepyrite: Geol. Soe.
                                    London Quart. Jour., v. 113, p. 429-440.
                           12.        , 1962, Further studieson micro-organisms
                                                                              and the presenceof •yngenetiepyrite:
                                    Palaeontology,v. 5.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                           366                                                  L. G. LOVE

                           13. Love, L. G., and Murray, J. W., 1962, Biogenetic pyrite in Recent sediments of Christ-
                                  church Harbour, England: Am. Jour. Sci.
                           14. Love, L. G., and Zimmerman, D. O., 1961, Bedded pyrite and micro-organisms from the
                                  Mount Isa Shale: Ecoa. G•oL., v. 56, p. 873-896.
                           15. Neuhaus, A., 1940, Ober die Erzffihrung des Kupfermergels der Haaseler und der Gr6ditzer
                                  Mulde in Schleisien: Zeitschr. f. angew Min., v. 2, p. 304-343.
                           16. Oftedahl, C., 1958, A theory of exhalative sedimentary ores: Geol. Foren. Forh., v. 80,
                                    p. 1-19.
                           17. Pompeckj, F. J., 1914, Das Meer des Kupferschiefer: Branca-Festchrift, Leipzig, p. 444-
                                    494.
                           18. Richter, G., 1941, Geologische Gesetzm/issigkeiten in der Metallffihrung des Kupfer-
                                  schiefers: Arch. Lagerst.-Forsch., v. 73.
                           19. Rust, G. W., 1935, Colloidal primary copper ores at Cornwall Mines, Southeastern
                                  Missouri: Jour. Geology, v. 43, p. 398-426.
                           20. Schneiderh6hn, H., 1923, ChalkographischeUnterschung des Manfelder Kupferschiefers:
                                  N. Jahrb. f. Min., B47, p. 1-38.
                           21.--,    1926, Erzfuhrung und Geffige des Mansfelder Kupferschiefers: Metall und Erz,
                                    v. 23, p. 143-146.
                           22. Schouten, C., 1946, Some notes on mlcropseudomorphism: Ecoa. G•oI.., v. 41, p. 348-382.
                           23. --.,     1946, The role of sulfur bacteria in the formation of the so-called sedimentary copper
                                    ores and pyrite ore bodies: Ecoa. G•oL., v. 41, p. 517-538.
                           24. Schuchert, C., 1915, The conditions of black shale deposition as illustrated by the Kupfer-
                                    schiefer and Lias of Germany: Am. Phil. Soc. Trans., v. 54, p. 259-269.
                           25. Siegl, W., 1941, Zur Genesis des Kupferschiefers: Min. Petr. Mitt., v. 52, p. 347-362.
                           26. Stanton, R. L., 1960, General features of the conformable "Pyritic" Orebodies. Part I--
                                    Field Association. Can. Inst. Min. Trans., v. 63, p. 22-27.
                           27. Str•m, K. M., 1939, Landlocked waters and the deposition of Black Muds: Recent Marine
                                    Sediments Ed., P. D. Trask, London, p. 356-372.
                           28. Westoil, T. S., 1943, Mineralisation of the Permian rocks of S. Durham: Geol. Mag.,
                                    v. 80, p. 119-120.
                           29. Woolnough, W. G., 1937, Sedimentation in Barred Basins and Source Rocks of Oil:
                                    Am. Assoc. Petr. Geol. Bull., v. 21, p. 1101-1157.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​57/​3/​350/​3481386/​350.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
