                                     NOTES            ON       THE        ORIGIN            OF      THE           MANSFELD
                                                                 COPPER             DEPOSITS.

                                                             CHARLES             HENRY          WHITE.        •

                                                                               ABSTRACT.


                                       A brief outline of the structure of the region is followed by
                                     observationson conditions underground at the Wolf shaft at
                                     Eisleben in June 1932, which indicate that the deposits are
                                     epigenetic.

                              THE copperdepositsof the Mansfelddistrict are confinedchiefly
                              to a thin bed of black bituminous Permian shale which varies in
                              thicknessfrom five inchesor lessto twenty inches,the average
                              being about nine inches. The shaleunderliesan area of 7000
                              squaremiles, but only a small fraction of it is known to be min-
                              eralized. Fifty squaremiles have been worked out, and known
                              reservesare estimatedat ten squaremiles.
                                The minesin this districthavebeenworkedfor 744 yearsand
                              haveproducedupwardsof a.million and a half tonsof copper.
                              The oreasminedcontainsfrom 2.5 to 2.8 percentcopper,andthe
                              annualproductionis about25,000 tonsof the metal. Silver, lead,
                              and zinc are alsoproduced.
                                The structurein the vicinity of Mansfeld is an opensyncline
                              with axis gently rising toward the west. The distanceon the
                              surfacebetweenthe outcropsof the north limb and those of the
                              southlimb is 15 miles. The dip toward the axis varies from five
                              to tdn degrees. The formationis brokenby many faults which
                              are roughlyparallel to the axis of the syncline. The fractures
                              are pre-mineral,but there has beenconspicuous post-mineraldis-
                              placement.
                                My personal observationshave been limited to the district
                              ß
                              aroundEislebenand undergroundat the Wolf shaft. This shaft
                                  • Presented before the Society of Economic Geologists at a joint session with the
                               Geological Society of America, Boston Meeting, December 29-3 •, x94•.

                                                                                      64




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​37/​1/​64/​3477832/​64.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                ORIGIN OF MANSFELD COPPER DEPOSITS.                                                        65

                              at the timeof my visit (JuneI932) was557 metersdeep. It is
                              vertical,and at a considerable
                                                           depthbelow the surface,it passes
                              throughthecoppershaleandcontinues   wellbelowintotheunder-
                              lyingsandyconglomerate.Fromthestationat thebottomof the
                              shaft a horizontaldriveprovidesa haulageway in the footwallto
                              the ore bedrathecoppershale.
                                The shaleat this point is twelve inchesthick and dips at six
                              degrees fromthehorizontal. The pebbles in the underlying sandy
                              conglomerate are nearlyall white quartzas large as three inches
                              in diameterbut mostlysmaller,and grade down in sizetoward
                              the top to a coarsesand with grains from one-tenthto one-
                              twentiethof an inchthick. There are alsoa few pebblesof black
                              chert and jasper. The sandybedsimmediatelybelowthe copper
                              shaleto a depthof from two to five feet are white--the Weiss-
                              liegende,and below that they are stainedfaintly red with iron-
                              oxide--the Rotliegende. The Weissliegendeappearsto be an
                              integralpart of the Rotliegendewith a gradualreduction.in size
                              of grain towardthe top and a ratherabruptlossof colorthat does
                              not conformto planesof depositionor to cross-bedding, which is
                              common.

                                The transitionfrom white sandsto the coppershaleis abrupt,
                              and in someplacesmovementappearsto have taken placeon the
                              contact. Goingdownthe dip, the shalegraduallythins down to
                              an inchor less,and in someplaceswherethe bed is thin, copper
                              mineralization             extends down              into the white             sand a foot or so.
                               The coppershalemergesgraduallyupward into a dark impure
                               limestoneseveralfeet thick. Where the overlyinglimestonehas
                               a red.colorthe shalebeneathit is barrenof copper.
                                  Farther down the dip the formationsare cut off by a fault;
                               a blockseveralhundredfeet wide has beendroppeddown about
                               60 feet; beyondthe secondfault the coppershaleis found in its
                               normal position. Crushedcoppershale carrying ore has been
                               draggeddown alongthe fauks. Near the faults are many small
                               gash-lik
                                    e fissures
                                            a meteror soin length
                                                                anda fewcentimeters
                               wide filled with calcite and possiblysome gypsumma post-ore
                               deposit. There are many faultsin the districtbut mostlyof small




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​37/​1/​64/​3477832/​64.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                              66                                CHARLES HENRY                   WHITE.

                              throw, from two inchesto two feet, rarely 150 to 300 feet. They
                              are comm,
                                     only short,parallel,and closetogether.
                                   The chief ore minerals are bornite and chalcocite, the former
                              predominating. Chalcopyriteand pyrite are alsopresent,having
                              beenintroducedlater. The ore is not evenlydistributedthrough-
                              out the bed.             It is more concentrated near the base and near the
                              faults; away from the faults the bed is often muchleaner. The
                              ore mineralsoccur in minute particlesirregularly disseminated
                              throughoutthe shaleor concentrated  in streaks,generallyparallel
                              with the bedding. It also occursin small nodulesor concretions
                              immediatelyunder the shalein the sandstoneand in the impure
                              limestoneabove. Veins intersectingthe shale and the under-
                              lying sandstone carry the nickelarsenides--niccolite,
                                                                                  chloanthite,
                              and maucheritewith chalcopyrite,molybdenite,and uraninite.
                              Zincandleadsulphides
                                                occur
                                                    in theupper
                                                              partof theshale.The
                              ores also carry small amountsof gold, silver, platinum, and
                              vanadium.
                                Geologistsfrom the early adolescence
                                                                   of the sciencehave dis-
                              cussedthe origin of the Mansfeld deposits. In I756 Lehmann
                              suggested that the copperwas depositedin sea water with the
                              shaleand is, therefore,syngenetic.A majority of the geologists
                               whohavestudiedthe deposits
                                                        sincehaveconcurred
                                                                         in his opinion.
                              Among theseare B. yon Cotta, yon Groddeck,Steltzner,Bergeat,
                               Lindgren,Pompeckj,Johannes       Walther, Schneiderh6hn,  R. Lang,
                               R. H. Rastall,P. D. Trask,• and J. W. Gregory.3 The operating
                               staff of the mine at the time of my visit alsoheldthis view.
                                 In I889 Beyschlag    advanced  the theorythat the oresat Kams-
                               dorf had their origin in the adjacentPermian eruptiverocks.
                               He believedthat the copperwas leachedfrom the eruptiveand
                               wascarriedin solutionup the faultswhenceit spreadthroughthe
                               shalewhereit was reducedby the bituminousmatter. In I893
                               Po•epnyadvocated this ideafor Mansfeld, and it wasadopted
                               by HenryLouis,Beck,S. F. Emmons,   J. E. Spurr,andKrusch
                               and Vogt (I92I) but later (I929) Kruschchanged  to the syn-
                               genetictheory.
                                    Trask, P. D.: EcoN. Gv.or•., 2o: 746, x925.
                                    Gregory, J. W.: Inst. Min. & Met., London, Dec., x93o.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​37/​1/​64/​3477832/​64.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                                                ORIGIN OF M•INSFELD COPPERDEPOSITS.                                                        67

                               It is not my purpose
                                                  in thesenotesto weighall the evidence
                                                                                      for
                             andagainstthetwo.theories .butmerelyto recordmy observations
                             andtheirimplicationswith respectto theoriginof thedeposits.
                                  I. The concentration of ore near the base of the shale and near
                              the faultssuggests
                                              thatthe orecamefrombeneath
                                                                       theshaleand
                              enteredit alongthe faults.
                                2. The leachingagentthat removedthe iron from the sand
                              beneaththe shaleapparently
                                                      wasguidedby the lowersurfaceof
                              the shaleas it movedup the dip.
                                3-The Weissliegende  were no doubt originallyRotliegende
                              sincethe bleachingcuts indiscriminately
                                                                    throughcross-bedding
                              and other structureswithout referenceto beddingplanes.
                                  4. The occurrence
                                                 of redareasin theoverlying
                                                                          calcareous
                                                                                  beds
                              wherethe shaleis barrensuggests
                                                            that at thosepointsthe copper-
                              bearingfluidfoundno opening  by whichit couldenterthe shale
                              andpassthroughit to reducethe iron oxidein the overlyingbed.
                                5. Ore in the sandstonebeneaththe shalewherethe latter is
                              thin indicates
                                           thattheoreis notsyngeneticwith the shale;neither
                              couldthe ore in the crossfracturesin the shalebe syngenetic.
                                  The chiefstumbling    blockof the epigeneticists  hasbeentheir
                               inabilityto pointdirectlyto a magmatic     source.But thisis true
                               of manycopper      depositsandthereis muchevidence     thattherela-
                               tion betweenintrusivesand ore depositsis more often tectonic
                               thangenetic. I aminclined     to believethattheorefluidsat Mans-
                               feld camefrom greatdepthsthroughthe east-west         fracturesinto
                               theunderlying     poroussandstone andmovedup thedipunderthe
                               bituminous    shale,reducingthe iron oxidein the sandstone     and
                               dissolving   it; that the solutionpassed  into the shale,especially
                               whereit wasfractured,    anddeposited  thesulphides  in thestrongly
                               reducing  environment.The east-west      veinsin the Harz moun-
                               tains west of Mansfeld were probablycontemporaneous             and
                               cogenetic.Batemangivesa similarexplanation          for the forma-
                               tionof hypogene     chalcocite
                                                            at theBristolminein Connecticut. 4
                                  Therewereapparently      two periods of mineralization at Mans-
                                feld; the first introduced borniteand chalcocite; and the second,
                                  4 Bateman, Alan M., Ecoa. GEo*.., xS: xzz-x66, x923.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​37/​1/​64/​3477832/​64.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
                               68                               CHARLES           HENRY          WHITE.


                              arsenidesof nickel and cobalt, chalcopyrite,pyrite, and other
                              minor minerals. In its vast extentthe coppershaleof Mansfeld
                              is not unlikethe copper-bearing  bedsof NorthernRhodesiaand
                              of the Upper Peninsulaof Michigan,but the porosityof the
                              Rhodesian   and Michiganformationspermittedthe movementof
                              fluids through them, whereasat Mansfeld the porousbed lies
                              immediatelyunder the precipitatingbed. That metalliccopper
                              was not precipitated in the Mansfeldsandstone   as it was in the
                              Michiganconglomerate    may be dueto the smallamountof iron
                              oxidein the Rotliegende  whichwasoverwhelmed     by the strongly
                              reducing hypogene fluids,whosetemperature  wasprobably  toolow
                              to permit reactionwith the silica.
                                 Gregory,advocatinga syngenetic   origin, writes "The assort-
                              mentof metalsis not surprising
                                                           in a sedimentaryore,but notthe
                              assemblyof metalsthat wouldbeexpected to bederivedfrom one
                              eruptivemagma." The evidenceis clear that there were two
                              periodsof mineralization;
                                                     thefirst,apparently,
                                                                        a normalhypogene
                              fluidcarryingborniteand chalcoclte;and the second,similarto
                              that whichwasresponsible for the Sudbury(Canada)deposits.
                              The second necessarily
                                                   couldnot be syngenetic and the evidence
                              apparentlyturnsthescalein favorof an epigenetic
                                                                            originfor the
                              first also.
                                For theprivilege of makingthisstudyI am indebted   to the
                              officials
                                      andoperating  staffof thecompanyat Eislebenwhoaf-
                              fordedmeeveryfacility,andwhogenerously   presented me with
                              choicespecimens  from the coppershale,includingthe nickel
                              arsenides,
                                       nativesilver,anda wellpreserved
                                                                    fossilfishPalaeoniscus
                              freieslebeni
                                        Blainville.
                                    SAN FRANCISCO,  CAL.,
                                      Dec. •, •94•.




Downloaded from pubs.​geoscienceworld.​org/​segweb/​economicgeology/​article-pdf/​37/​1/​64/​3477832/​64.​pdf by Stanford University user on 21 September 2026
