===== page 1
CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 317-330

 

THE COPPER PROVINCE
OF NORTHERN MICHIGAN, US.A.

Alexander C. BRown (*)

ABSTRACT

The late Proterozoic, Keweenawan strata of northern Michigan contain two principal
types of copper mineralization, each at a distinctly separate stratigraphic position. Native
copper occurs in amygdaloidal and fragmental flow tops and in reddish interflow conglomerates
of the Portage Lake Lava Series. Chalcocite and combined chalcocite-native copper mineral-
ization is found as fine-grained disseminations in basal portions of the Nonesuch Shale, a
sulfide-bearing, organic-rich formation lying some 100°s to 1000's of metres above the
Keweenawan lavas. An extensive red-bed conglomerate and a more local mafic to felsic flow
pile lie stratigraphically between the Portage Lake Lava and Nonesuch strata. The Nonesuch
mineralization of the White Pine area is also geographically centred some 60 miles southwest
of the main native copper districts of Calumet and Houghton. Both copper types contain
silver as a significant minor constituent.

Exploration and investigation of these two camps have taken place in large part as
distinctly separate operations. The native copper ore, exploited almost continuously since
1844, occurs as irregular stratiform lodes at numerous stratigraphic levels in steep to
moderately dipping beds. Many observations including those of mineral zoning, indicators of
elevated metamorphic or hydrothermal temperatures, and ore controls related to relative
permeabilities within and between stratigraphic units suggest that source-bed or magmatic
concepts could best explain the origin of these lodes. On the other hand, the White Pine
mineralization, exploited since 1954, is remarkably continuous and uniform in grade over an
extensive area within strictly defined basal beds of the gently to moderately inclined Nonesuch
Formation. It possesses all basic characteristics of a classic sedimentary deposit. Detailed
studies in recent years have suggested, however, that mineralization of the Nonesuch may
have resulted from an upward influx of cupriferous solutions which caused replacement of
syndiagenetic iron sulfides and some accompanying precipitation of native copper in the
presence of organic matter.

In past years concerted efforts by many individuals and organizations have produced a
vast fund of information and interpretations concerning this famous copper province.
Undoubtedly, a definitive solution to the occurrence and genesis of the Keweenawan mineral-
ization will depend not only on further careful investigations at the local scale, but also on
the discovery of additional regional guides such as those currently developing concepts
resulting from stratigraphic and structural analyses throughout the Lake Superior basin.

(*) Département de Génie minéral, Ecole Polytechnique, Université de Montréal,
C.P. 6079, Succursale “A”, Montréal H3C 3A7, Québec, Canada.

===== page 2
318 ALEXANDER C, BROWN

INTRODUCTION

The Lake Superior copper deposits are contained in an area known as the
Keweenaw peninsula, a linear zone some 200 km in length along the south shore
of Lake Superior (fig. 1). Within this region, late Precambrian Keweenawan strata
have been successfully exploited for native copper, principally in basalts and con-
glomerates, for some 130 years; and for copper sulfide and lesser amounts of native
copper in “black shales” for some 20 years. Copper is accompanied by important
traces of silver in both geologic environments.

This mine production has quite naturally stirred much interest in other areas of
Keweenawan rocks which occur around the present Lake Superior basin, and has
resulted in a vast number of geologic studies and exploration programs throughout
the immediate area and possible extensions of the Keweenawan copper province.
The recognition in recent years of a probable Precambrian rift features has added
new dimensions to current geologic concepts and economic studies in the basin.

This paper deals mainly with the nature of the Lake Superior copper mining
camps and with regional aspects of the Keweenaw basin. Certain portions of the
text result from the writer’s personal studies and his continued interest in this highly
intriguing metallogenic province, but obviously the majority of data and inter-
pretations are borrowed from the careful work of many, many other students of the
district. Hopefully, the credits mentioned will fully and accurately represent the
contributions of a least the major pertinent studies; of course, the writer assumes
responsibility for the present synthesis and his own interpretations.

KEWEENAWAN BASIN GEOLOGY

The Keweenawan strata (table 1) occupy an arcuate structural trough largely
concealed beneath the present glacial Lake Superior and beneath fiat-lying
Paleozoic sediments along southwest and southeastward extensions of the basin.
Nevertheless, good exposures are present around the rim of Lake Superior (fig. 1).

Animikean rocks (>1650 m.yr.), including Lake Superior iron formations
enclose the trough to the south and northwest. Archean rocks (>2480 m.yr.)
enclose it in turn on the south, north, northeast and northwest. Keweenawan
intrusives and flows have been dated at approximately 1050 to 1 200 m.yr. in age.

In general, the Keweenawan is divisible into a lower sedimentary sequence, a
middle volcanic sequence, and an upper sedimentary sequence. The Lower
Keweenawan is best exposed as a 200 m thickness of sediments known as the
Sibley Series north of Lake Superior.

The Middle Keweenawan consists mainly of tholeiitic flood basalts and minor
but important interflow red-bed conglomerates. The volcanics are composed of
several hundred individual flows commonly measuring tens of metres in thickness
and possibly attaining some 9000 m in total thickness (White, 1968). They are
known variously as the Portage Lake Lava Series and the South Shore Traps in
the copper mining districts, as the North Shore Volcanics adjacent to the Duluth
gabbro complex in Minnesota, and as the Osler Series in Ontario north of Lake

a

===== page 3
 

We. VINSNINAd ©
si H SDS MVNAIM DG
a Sym,

N3LODIdIHOIW

S3AISNYLNI NVMVN33M3x% Yorvw KJ

nvaHouv [2y]

Ayiw40j u09uQ ————-———.

43ONNHL nvaniwiny Lv]
Ajiwsojuooun

NVMVN33M3y Y3Mo7 f
NVMVN33M3™ 37aaIW [T]
NVMVN33M4ax Y3ddn fess

NVIMGW 91 /NVMVYN3AM ay “0 Eee
Ajlwis0opuooun

NvIdNs<—NnviNaMvo ‘na |
—dNs9371 —

ynog i
ajpkoy am -

 

Fic. 1. — General geology of the Lake Superior region (after Halls and West, 1971).

===== page 4
320 ALEXANDER C. BROWN

TABLE I. — Stratigraphy of the Lake Superior Copper Districts

 

Paleozoic Upper Cambrian to Silurian
seosetesoteecnnseneececraneneneneneasanasenaseceasnasenseeseas Unconformity -------------------nevn nn ensereretereenceccctctete eres

Upper Keweenawan/

{ .
Lower Cambrian \ Jacobsville and Bayfield Sandstones

Freda Sandstone

Upper Keweenawan { Nonesuch Shale

Late Copper Harbor Conglomerate/
Precambrian . Unnamed Formation
Middle Keweenawan Portage Lake Lava Series/

North Shore Volcanics/Osler Series

Lower Keweenawan Sibley Series (on north shore)
sorereatececneeanennarentatesnateneananannassrescatsscese soe Unconformity --------------senncerereroretereecncteteserecrenessenens

Middle Animikie
Precambrian

Unconformity ---n-------voceeeeesenrsecteceeteeceetee eect

 

 

Early Archean
Precambrian

 

 

 

Superior. Similar volcanics are exposed on Isle Royale and Michipocoten Island
within the Lake, and at other minor localities around the lake.

A major projection of these mafic flows (fig. 2) has been made on the basis of
a well-defined mid-continent gravity high trending southwest from Lake Superior
to Kansas, and southeast beneath the Michigan basin (Muehlberger et al., 1966).

Upper Keweenawan strata are composed predominantly of red-bed con-
glomerates and sandstones, and a relatively minor black shale section. The Copper
Harbor Conglomerate was formerly considered as the basal non-volcanic unit of
the Upper Keweenawan, but it has been found to contain local mafic flows and has
been relegated to the Middle Keweenawan (White, 1972). The Upper Keweenawan
now consists of the greyish Nonesuch Shale (approximately 200 m thick) and the
overlying Freda Sandstone, a red-bed section, which may exceed 4000 m in
thickness.

An unnamed formation consisting of 0-2 500 m of mafic and felsic flows under-
lies the White Pine area. It has the form of a volcanic dome overlying the Portage
Lake Lava Series and was buried by contemporaneous and/or subsequent onlap
of the Copper Harbor Conglomerate.

The Upper Keweenawan is apparently overlain by the Bayfield and Jacobsville
Formations which are probably laterally-equivalent, non-fossiliferous sandstones

===== page 5
COPPER PROVINCE OF NORTHERN MICHIGAN 321

 

Fic. 2. — Keweenawan mid-continental rift features (from Card et al., 1972).

located in Wisconsin and Michigan, respectively. These strata are in turn succeeded
unconformably by fossiliferous Upper Cambrian beds. The Bayfield and Jacobsville
Formations are generally considered lithologically more similar to the Freda
Sandstone than to late Cambrian strata, and are commonly assigned to the upper-
most Keweenawan, although a Lower Cambrian age is also possible. Seismic
studies indicate that these sandstones probably form a thick friable sedimentary
unit underlying most of Lake Superior (Halls and West, 1971).

The structure of the Keweenawan basin is dominated by an arcuate syn-
clinorium filled by inward-dipping Keweenawan extrusives and sediments. White
(1960@) draws attention to the increasing thickness of stratigraphic units toward the
synclinal axis, and suggests that flows and sediments generally kept pace with sub-
sidence of the basin. Bent pipe-amygdules in lavas suggest flow outward from the
centre of the basin whereas current analysis indicate a northerly transport of
sediments toward the basin. The total thickness of Keweenawan strata in the central
part of the basin is estimated to be as much as 55-60 km on the basis of seismic
studies (Berry and West; and Smith et al., both in Steinhart and Smith, 1966).

Numerous moderate to steeply-dipping reverse faults parallel the north and
south sides of the Keweenaw basin. The best known of these is the northward-
dipping Keweenaw fault which forms the south boundary of the Michigan copper
districts and separates the Portage Lake Lavas from the Animikie rocks and the
Jacobsville Sandstone to the south. The Keweenaw fault probably continues
toward the southwest along the Lake Owen fault in Wisconsin.

===== page 6
322 ALEXANDER C. BROWN

This southern system of boundary faults is complemented on the north side of
the basin by the Douglas fault and its possible extension, the Isle Royale fault,
interpreted from seismic investigations in the north-central portion of Lake Superior
(Halls and West, 1971).

It seems clear that the Keweenaw basin represents a late Precambrian graben
and horst structure with rapid infilling, followed by reverse thrusting during late
stages of rift adjustment. The exposures of Keweenawan strata north and south
of the lake have been tilted gently to moderately, even steeply, toward the basin
axis during these late movements.

A local anticlinal flexure (Porcupine Mountain structure, fig. 1) with an accom-
panying northward-dipping thrust fault occurs on the south flank of the basin in
the White Pine area (Hubbard, 1971). The Nonesuch Shale copper mineralization
is contained in synclinal limbs of this structure.

Among intrusives of the Lake Superior region, the Duluth Gabbro complex
(1 142425 m.yr.) is especially intriguing since (1) it dips from its exposed location
on the north shore toward the Keweenawan peninsula, (2) it correlates closely
in age with Keweenawan strata, and (3) it contains copper and nickel in large
amounts. While it may be metallogenically attractive to postulate that the Duluth
complex underlies the lake proper and gave rise to cupriferous ore solutions which
ascended through strata of the Keweenaw peninsula (e.g., Butler and Burbank,
1929), gravity data now indicate that the complex must pinch out near the northern
shoreline of the lake (White, 1966).

A smaller sill-like complex occurs at Mellon, Wisconsin at the probable junction
of the Lake Owens and Keweenaw faults (fig. 1). It intrudes Portage Lake Lavas
and possibly the Copper Harbor Conglomerate. Similarities in form and petrology
to the Duluth Gabbro have long suggested a common origin for these two
complexes.

Other intrusives of Keweenawan affiliation include the Logan sills and dikes
of generally basaltic composition. These are especially common along the north-
west shore of Lake Superior where they invade Lower and Middle Keweenawan
strata.

Alkaline complexes occur northeast of Lake Superior along the north-northeast
trending Kapuskasing subprovince within the Superior (Archean) province. A
portion of these intrusives are distinctly pre-Keweenawan in age, but a younger
group (approximately 1050 m.yr.) appears to correlate rather closely with
Keweenawan ages (Stockwell et al., 1970).

NATIVE COPPER MINERALIZATION

The following descriptions of native copper in interbedded tholeiitic flows and
red-bed conglomerates of the Portage Lake Lava Series along the Keweenawan
Peninsula (fig. 3) are taken mainly from Weege and Pollock (1971), Weege et al.
(1972) and White (1968, 19716). Other sources are mentioned as appropriate.

The 200 or more flows of the Portage Lake Lava Series are chiefly amygdaloidal
basalts, with lesser amounts of andesites and a few rhyolites. Individual flows
commonly measure 30-50 m in thickness and are laterally continuous for tens of
kilometres.

Some 20 conglomerate and sandstone horizons occur within the lava flows.

===== page 7
ed on the north side of
, the Isle Royale fault,
ortion of Lake Superior

ite Precambrian graben
se thrusting during late
strata north and south
seply, toward the basin

, fig. 1) with an accom-
h flank of the basin in
e copper mineralization

uluth Gabbro complex
om its exposed location
2) it correlates closely
yer and nickel in large
stulate that the Duluth
ous ore solutions which
Butler and Burbank,
+h out near the northern

 

at the probable junction
les Portage Lake Lavas
; in form and petrology
1 origin for these two

> Logan sills and dikes
mmon along the north-
id Middle Keweenawan

long the north-northeast
(Archean) province. A
in age, but a younger
fe rather closely with

ION

ded tholeiitic flows and
along the Keweenawan
ck (1971), Weege et al.
d as appropriate.

are chiefly amygdaloidal
olites. Individual flows
‘continuous for tens of

within the lava flows.

DY. a

Copper Harbor

mie

Keweenaw
Point

 

 

 

 

    
  

 

 

  

 

   
 

 

 

S c
o v5 0 . 3
5 0 Br ao 3
= e = a vo
a 5 oS o 2g oo
oO wv es no = [os
2 c vo 2 E 133
° 5 ee ge g ‘ 20
2 B 85 25 3 Be vibes
Eb o ge 4 c ifs
= Vo 0 o c [so
z Bag se ES 2: i5s
a 2 26 4 < Jes
a ° o6 #eé oO io &
° US ¢ o . 53
x °° 2 3 3 q Jeg.
Ww 7 ira Su 2 " ; oe
ac o dq °
ao O°
° a ~ ¢
oO =
t oO
Y,
%&
zt
v
<q

 

5 i
°
3
S Nae)
= / 4
° / =
i °
a
wi /
Se /

SO,

Ot °
°®@ x
o> =/

% S/o
o
oO gig
S/S
ag 2
/s
;
°
Fic. 3. — General geology of the Keweenawan copper province of Michigan (after White,

1971b).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 8
324 ALEXANDER C, BROWN

They are typically felsic in composition and contain pebbles of quartz and felspar
porphyry. Conglomerates make up some 3 to 8 % of the Lava Series and have the
general configuration of discontinuous lensoid sheets. On the basis of identified
channelways, crossbeds, coarse pebble size and imbricated pebbles, White (1968,
1971b) considers the conglomerate to represent stream sediments which were
deposited on nearly horizontal flow tops by generally northward flowing streams.

The Portage Lake Lava Series is succeeded upward by the Copper Harbor
Conglomerate, followed by the Nonesuch Shale and Freda Sandstone. All strata
have strikes parallel to the trend of the Keweenawan Peninsula, and dip 20 to 75°
northwest toward the centre of the Lake Superior basin. The base of the Lava
Series is truncated by the Keweenawan Fault, a reverse strike fault separating
Middle Keweenawan lavas from the Upper Keweenawan (?) Jacobsville Sandstone *
to the south of the fault.

Native copper and minor native silver occur almost entirely within permeable
portions of the Lava Series, i.e., in amygdaloidal flow tops of otherwise massive
basalts, and in interflow conglomerates. Of the 5 x 10° tons of copper produced,
almost 60 % has come from six major and several minor amygdaloids, and almost
40 % from conglomerates, especially the Calumet and Hecla Conglomerate. About
2 % of the total copper has been mined from cross-cutting fissure veins.

Amygdaloidal Lodes

Among flow top types, “cellular” amygdaloids (Weege and Pollock, 1971),
characterized by isolated vescicles, typically contain only traces of copper; “coalesc-
ing cellular” amygdaloids with interconnecting vescicles host one major mine;
“fragmental amygdaloids, apparently formed by flow beneath a chilled crust, host
several major deposits; and “scoriaceous” amygdaloids, characterized by sandy
infillings of fragmented flows, are mineralized at one stratigraphic horizon. Frag-
mental amygdaloids generally grade downward into non-fragmental amygdaloids
which contain little or no copper values.

The thickness of lodes is naturally quite variable, but may commonly attain
3 to 5 m. The lateral configuration and dimensions are also highly irregular.

Conglomerate Lodes

Mineralization in conglomerate beds between basalt flows occurs in the form of
lensoid sheets. In thick conglomerate sections, a noticeably greater proportion of
copper is usually found close to the upper and lower contacts, and lower grade ore
may exist at intermediate levels. In thin stratigraphic thicknesses, the entire con-
glomerate section may be well-mineralized.

Native copper in conglomerates is commonly but not everywhere associated
with bleached rock in which the usual deep red color due to hematite has changed
to a salmon-pink color. The chemical exchange responsible for this alteration
apparently involves a partial reduction of ferric iron as well as some loss of iron.

Considerable exploration success has been realized in recent years (Weege and
Pollock, 1971; Weege et al., 1972) from careful analysis of stream channels and
interpreted ore solution barriers within conglomerate beds. A fundamental factor in

===== page 9
COPPER PROVINCE OF NORTHERN MICHIGAN 325

this success has been a conviction that the native copper mineralization was
deposited from ascending hot aqueous solutions.

The barrier concept is clearly and concisely explained by Weege et al. (1972,
p. 625):

The most reasonable explanation for the form of many deposits lies in the barrier hypo-
thesis, originally advanced by Graton, Broderick, and Butler in special reports to the
Calumet and Hecla Mining Co. This theory visualizes the ore solutions as travelling up dip
along certain amygdaloids and conglomerates with throughgoing permeability (Butler and
Burbank, 1929). Inasmuch as the thickness and permeability of a given amygdaloid or con-
glomerate bed may vary enormously from place to place, flow tended to be concentrated
along those pathways that afforded the least resistance to flow from depth to the surface, and
tended to avoid relatively impermeable areas, which would thus act as barriers. Solutions were
funneled by barriers of various types into the areas that are now mineralized... Where no
major barrier or constriction was present in a thick layer acting as a major channel way, the
flow would not be concentrated, and as a result, small amounts of copper could be dispersed
through a large volume of rock that would not be rich enough to mine (Broderick, 1931).

Contouring of conglomerate thicknesses at the Kingston mine (Weege et al.,
1972) clearly demonstrates a positive correlation of good ore with thinning of the
conglomerate.

An important economic oreshoot was also located by recognition of tributary
stream channels (the new Centennial No. 3-6 deposit) merging with the spectacularly
large and rich Calumet and Hecla orebody which occupies the main channel. Both
the main and tributary channels are characterized by greater thicknesses of highly
permeable conglomerate relative to the more compact sediments bordering the
channelways. The nonchannel sediments with fine-grained matrices would again
serve as barriers, whereas the stream channels would behave as conduits suitable
for ore solution transport as well as for interstitial mineralization.

To the writer’s knowledge, all current concepts on genesis of the native copper
lodes involve ascending hydrothermal solutions coming from deeper portions of
the Keweenawan basin. Evidence of low grade alteration of mineralized flow tops,
and the attractive possibilities of warm ore solutions at depth are principally
responsible for the consensus.

Some authors (e.g., Butler and Burbank, 1929) point to the immense igneous
activity indicated by the flows themselves and by the roughly contemporaneous
Duluth gabbro. However, White (1968) notes the paucity of sulfur in the native
copper lodes, and suggests that a mafic magmatic source would probably result
instead in a characteristic copper sulfide mineralization.

Others (e.g., Stoiber and Davidson, 1959: White, 1968; Jolly, 1973) suggest
that ore solutions were generated by metamorphism at depth and rose to mineralize
permeable zones near surface. Jolly proposes that dehydration of the basalts under
metamorphism involving epidotization at depth would leach much more than
adequate quantities of trace element copper from flows; and that hydration of
near-surface flows by the ascending, chloride-rich, metamorphic fluids producing
typical pumpellyite and chlorite alteration would cause deposition of copper by
simple over-saturation in the ore channels.

Hegelson (pers. commun., 1967; 1969) has ofered another attractive explana-
tion for reduction of copper to the native metal. His studies of metal complexes
in aqueous solutions at elevated temperatures have demonstrated that simple com-
plexes such as HCl and perhaps CuCl may exist as stable and appreciably soluble
species at temperatures above approximately 300°C. On cooling, the cuprous

===== page 10
 

326 ALEXANDER C. BROWN

chloride complexes may disproportionate spontaneously into equal amounts of
cupric chloride complexes (oxidation) and native copper (reduction). This process
would provide for a 50 % efficient deposition of copper by reduction from ascend-
ing ore solutions.

Some sulfide mineralization occurs in a 15 mile segment of lower Portage Lake
Lavas east of the principal native copper deposits (fig. 3). Studies by Robertson
(1972) indicate a zonal distribution of copper-iron sulfides and a close association
of mineralization with andesite dikes which also contain copper-bearing sulfides.
A magmatic origin is favored although leaching of copper from flows at depth is
not excluded.

NONESUCH SHALE MINERALIZATION

Since White and Wright’s (1954) initial description of the White Pine mineral-
ization, a large number of detailed studies and analyses have been carried out on
the Nonesuch Shale, chiefly to define the nature, distribution and controls of
mineralization. This section will attempt to summarize the principal findings and
interpretations to date.

The White Pine copper mineralization (fig. 3) occurs mainly as sulfide and
native metal disseminations within well-bedded, fine-grained clastic horizons at the
base of the Nonesuch Shale. A very minor portion of mineralization is located in
fractures considered to be post-ore in age.

In a typical vertical profile, a few inches or feet of underlying Copper Harbor
Conglomerate may contain interstitial native copper and minor native silver of
ore grade. The copper is found in diagenetically chloritized zones and intimately
associated with organic particles. Hamilton (1967) suggests that these occurrences
resulted from chemical reduction of initially reddish conglomerate by connate
solutions which were pressed out of the overlying Nonesuch during compaction
and carried soluble organic matter into the immediately underlying aquifer. Favor-
able reduction zones created in this manner would then be susceptible to native
copper mineralization from cupriferous solutions circulating in the Copper Harbor
Formation.

The overlying Nonesuch contains several widespread ore horizons in its basal
section (for details, see White and Wright, 1954; White, 1968). Native copper, and
again minor native silver, may accompany the more dominant copper mineral,
chalcocite, in the lowermost beds, but upper mineralized horizons typically contain
fine-grained chalcocite as the only ore mineral.

Disseminated chalcocite generally extends stratigraphically upward in ore or
sub-ore quantities to a remarkably abrupt selvage surface, above which the beds are
consistently pyritic. The selvage surface cross-cuts strata at gentle to moderate
angles and varies in position from a few centimetres to about 15 m above the
base of the Nonesuch within the mine area. Concepts of post-sedimentary mineral-
ization from copper ascending at low temperatures into an initially pyritic, poorly
consolidated Nonesuch Shale have been advanced and refined to explain the
amounts, distribution, mineralogy and metal zoning in these strata (White, 1960b,
1971a; Brown, 1965, 1970, 1971; White and Wright, 1966; White, D. E., 1968).

Without attempting to recount all details of evidences gathered thus far, the

===== page 11
COPPER PROVINCE OF NORTHERN MICHIGAN 327

principal features which nevertheless support the above hypothesis may be sum-
marized as follows:

(1) Sulfide textures showing a systematic step-by-step replacement of syn-
diagenetic pyrite by Cu-Fe sulfides, and then Cu-sulfides within the narrow selvage
zone; this feature is interpreted as a fossil mineralization front.

(2) Chalcocite nodules surrounded by hematic halos at several horizons within
the ore zones, indicating probable replacement of iron-sulfide nodules, with con-
sequent redeposition of iron as hematite.

(3) A statistically reasonable inverse correlation between the amount of copper
deposited in lowermost ore horizons and the height of the selvage surface in the
Nonesuch strata, strongly suggesting that approximately equal amounts of copper
entered vertically into the Nonesuch across a broad basal area, and that little
copper remained to mineralize higher beds where a greater proportion of copper
was precipitated in thick or high grade ore beds at the base of the Nonesuch.

(4) Anomalous concentrations of minor metals (Cd, Pb and Zn) as sulfides
directly above the stratigraphically undulating selvage zone; these metals are less
sulfophile than copper and were presumably swept continuously upward before the
mineralization front. Luppens (1970) has also found anomalous mercury con-
centration above the selvage surface.

Not all observations support the early diagenetic replacement model. For
example, Jost (1968) discovered, and Rohrbacker (1969) confirmed, a mine locality
in which a selvage of Cu-Fe sulfides of as yet uncertain configuration and dimen-
sions occurs near the top of the Parting Shale unit and well below the top of the
cupriferous zone proper. This feature could be the first indication that cupriferous
and pyritic zones oscillated laterally with onlap and offlap facies of sedimentation
as has been suggested to explain lateral oscillations on a larger scale in the Zambian
Copperbelt deposits (Garlick, 1961).

Other investigations specifically intended to locate possible lateral oscillations
of the selvage surface at White Pine (e.g., Brown, 1965, 1971) did not reveal such
features. It is therefore not unreasonable to suggest that perhaps Jost’s discovery
represents an island of unmineralized shale within a cupriferous zone otherwise
formed according to the concepts of the diagenetic replacement model. Rohrbacker
(1971, pers. commun.) also found minute iron sulfide grains beneath the main Cu-Fe
selvage, and consequently questions the copper-sulfide replacement model.

DISCUSSION

The above description of the Michigan copper province in Keweenawan strata
illustrates the highly distinctive natures of two different, neighboring geologic
environments which nevertheless contain remarkably similar copper-silver con-
centrations, almost to the exclusion of other normally associated base metals.
Because there now exists rather substantial evidence that the native copper ores
were derived from ascending, warm solutions, it is certainly very tempting to extend
portions of this concept to explain the sulfur-dominated Nonesuch mineralization.
No doubt this bias has influenced some investigations at White Pine, but not without
some justification, for the majority of qualitative and quantitative data obtained
thus far have generally reinforced this view.

===== page 12
328 ALEXANDER C. BROWN

In the absence of diagnostic evidence in favor of an original sedimentary origin
for copper mineralization of the lower Nonesuch, the writer is presently inclined
to support the iron-sulfide replacement hypothesis for the White Pine ore, and to
view the two Michigan copper districts as resulting from closely related, ascending
ore solutions. In the native copper district, copper and silver probably precipitated
within the ore solution aquifer by saturation and/or reduction near surface. At
White Pine, similar solutions again precipitated native metals, but the majority
of copper precipitated as sulfides upon encountering the initially pyritic lower
Nonesuch Shale. The temperature of deposition at White Pine was probably lower
than in the native copper district; this may simply reflect the higher stratigraphic
level of the Nonesuch and/or its geographic separation from the native copper
regions. There may be no clear distinction in time between mineralization of the
two environments.

The proposed cupriferous solutions for both districts may have been generated
during still-active igneous events of approximately Middle to early Upper
Keweenawan time, or to the more passive leaching of metals during de-hydration
of flows at depth as adequately explained by Jolly (1973). The continued volcanism
until just prior to Nonesuch Shale deposition as evidenced by flows in the Copper
Harbor, and the apparent evolution of stratigraphically higher Middle Keweenawan
flows toward more felsic compositions suggests that late stage volcanic volatiles
may have emptied into subsurface aquifers or even onto surface in early Nonesuch
time. The occurrence of a rather large felsic dome stratigraphically beneath the
White Pine area is in fact surprisingly similar to the common association of base-
metal massive sulfides with felsic volcanic domes in calc-alkaline volcanic sequences
elsewhere (e.g., Sangster, 1972).

The lack of associated lead-zinc in abundance in the Michigan copper district
argues against a differentiating calc-alkaline magmatic source, and suggest that a
post-volcanic selective leaching process such as proposed by Jolly may be more
reasonable. However, the recognition of essentially monometallic, copper-pyrite
ores of volcanic affiliation in Cyprus (Hutchinson and Searle, 1971) and in New-
foundland (Upadhyay, 1973), for example, opens other avenues of speculation.

In fact, the copper-pyrite ores are now thought (Hutchinson, 1973) to be
closely related to deep crustal or mantle sources from which contemporaneous
tholeiitic flows emanate. Considering the immense volume and thickness of
tholeiitic basalt in the Keweenawan basin, it is very tempting to draw parallel
conclusions for the unique regional association of copper with basaltic volcanism
in the Lake Superior district. Additional incentive for these broad concepts arises
from the interpretation of the Keweenawan belt as a mid-continental rift which
probably tapped mantle sources of magma material. Hopefully, a constructive
balance of criticism among students of the Lake Superior copper province will
lead to further refinement of these oversimplified concepts of Keweenawan
metallogenesis.

References

ANNELLS, R. N. (1973). — Proterozoic flood basalts of eastern Lake Superior; The Kewee-
nawan volcanic rocks of the Mamainse Point area, Ontario. Geol. Surv. Can. Paper, 72-10,
27 p.

BRODERICK, T. M. (1931). — Fissure vein and lode relations in Michigan copper deposits.
Econ. Geology, Vol. 26, p. 840-856.

===== page 13
COPPER PROVINCE OF NORTHERN MICHIGAN 329

Brown, A. C. (1965). — Mineralogy at the Top of the Cupriferous Zone, White Pine Mine,
Ontonagon Co., Michigan. M.S. Thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 81 p.

Brown, A. C. (1970). — Environments of generation of some base-metal ore deposits. Econ.
Geology, Vol. 63, p. 301-335.

Brown, A. C. (1971). — Zoning in the White Pine copper deposit, Ontonagon County,
Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 66, p. 543-573.

Butter, B. S. and BuRBANK, W. S. (1929). — The copper deposits of Michigan. U.S. Geol.
Surv. Prof. Paper, 144, 238 p.

Burne, S. W., ScHwarcz, H. P. and Crocxet, J. H. (1972). — A sulfur isotopic study of the
White Pine mine, Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 67, p. 895-914.

Carp, K. D., CurcH, W. R., FRANKLIN, J. M., Frarey, M. J., RoBerTson, J. A., WEST, G. F.
and Youna, G. M. (1972). — The Southern province. In: Variations in Tectonic Styles in
Canada, R. A. Price and R. J. W. Douglas, eds. Geol. Assoc. Canada, Spec. Paper No. 11,

. 335-380.

Carp, K. D. and Hutcuinson, R. W. (1972). — The Sudbury structure: its regional geologic
setting. Geol. Assoc. Can., Spec. Paper No. 10, p. 67-78. _

CornwaLt, H. R. (1951). —— Differentiation in lavas of the Keweenawan Series and the origin
of the copper deposits of Michigan. Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., Vol. 62, p. 159-202.

EnsIon, C. O., Jr., WHITE, W. S., Wricut, J. C., Patrick, J. L., Leone, R. J., Hatnaway, D. J.,
TRAMMELL, J. W., Fritrs, J. J. and Wricut, T. L. (1968). — Copper deposits in the
Nonesuch Shale, White Pine, Michigan: Graton-Sales Volume 1. Ore Deposits of the
United States 1933/1967. Am. Inst. Min. Met. Petr. Eng., Inc., New York, p. 460-488.

Faure, G. (1964), —- The age of the Duluth gabbro complex and the Endion sill by the
whole-rock Rb-Sr method. Mass. Inst. Tech., 12th Annual Prog. Rept., p. 255-257. ,

Fraser, J. A., HOFFMANN, P. F., Irvine, T. N. and Mursky, G. (1972). — The Bear province.
Geol. Assoc. Canada, Spec. Paper No. 11, p. 453-503. .

Gar ick, W. G. (1961). — The syngenetic theory. In: The Geology of the Northern Rhodesian
Copperbelt. F. Mendelsohn, ed. MacDonald and Co., Ltd., London, 523 p.

Hats, H. C. and West, G. F. (1971). — A seismic refraction survey in Lake Superior. Can.
J. of Earth Sci., Vol. 8, p. 610-630.

Hamitton, S. K. (1967). — Copper mineralization in the upper part of the Copper Harbor
conglomerate at White Pine, Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 62, p. 885-904.

HELGEsON, H. C. (1969). — Thermodynamics of hydrothermal systems at elevated temperatures
and pressures. Amer. Jour. Sci., Vol. 267, p. 729-804.

Hupparp, H. A. (1971). — Keweenawan geology of the Porcupine Mountains, Western Upper
Peninsula, Michigan. Abstracts and Field Guide, 17th Ann. Inst. on Lake Superior
Geology, Duluth. .

Hutcunson, R. W. (1973). — Volcanogenic sulfide deposits and their metallogenic significance.
Econ. Geology, Vol. 68, p. 1223-1246.

Hutcuinson, R, W. and SEARLE, D. L. (1971). — Stratabound pyrite deposits in Cyprus and
relations to other sulfides ores. Soc. Mining Geologists Japan, Spec. Issue No. 3, p. 198-
205.

Jotty, W. T. (1973). — Behaviour of Cu, Zn and Ni during prehnite-pumpellyite rank meta-
morphism of the Keweenawan basalts, Northern Michigan. Geol. Sec. Amer. 1973 Annual
Meetings, Abstracts with Programs, Vol. 5, p. 684; Econ. Geology, in press.

Jost, M. (1968). — The White Pine Copper Deposit, Michigan, U.S.A., Mineralogical Investiga-
tion and Genetic Interpretation. Ph.D. dissertation, Johannes Gutenberg, Univ., Mainz,
78 p.

Krauskopr, K. B. (1967). — Source rocks for metal-bearing fiuids. In: Geochemistry of
Hydrothermal Ore Deposits, H. L. Barnes, ed. MacDonald and Co., Ltd., London, 523 p.

KumaraPELi, P. S. and Sautt, V. A. (1966). — The St. Lawrence Valley System: a North
American equivalent of the East African rift valley system. Can. J. Earth Sci., Vol. 3,
p. 639-658.

Leong, R. J., SEASor, R. W. and RopRBAcHER, T. J. (1971). — Geology of the White Pine
area. Guidebook for Field Conference, Michigan Copper District, Sept. 30-Oct. 2, 1971,
Society of Economic Geologists, p. 44-64. .

Luppens, J. A. (1970). — Distribution of mercury in selected drill holes from the White
Pine copper deposit, White Pine, Michigan. Unpublished M.S. Thesis, University of
Toledo, 59 p. . :

MUEHLBERGER, W. R. ef al. (1966). — Geochronology of the Midcontinent region, United
States, Part 3. J. Geophys. Res., Vol. 71, p. 5409-5426.

===== page 14
330 ALEXANDER C. BROWN

Rosertson, J. M. (1972). — Geology and Mineralogy of some Copper Sulfide Deposits,
Keweenaw County, Michigan. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Michigan, 125 p.

Rosertson, W. A. and Fanric, W. F. (1971). — The great Logan paleomagnetic loop. The
polar wandering path from Canadian Shield rocks during the Neohelikian era. Can. J.
Earth Sci., Vol. 8, p. 1355-1372.

ROHRBACKER, T. J. (1969). — Verification of Jost’s parting shale fringe zone. White Pine
Copper Company report.

Roy, J. L. and Fanric, W. F. (1973). — The paleomagnetism of Seal and Croteau Rocks form
the Grenville Front, Labrador: Polar wandering and tectonic implications. Can. J. Earth
Sci., Vol. 10, p. 1279-1301.

SANGSTER, D. F. (1972). — Precambrian volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits in Canada:
a review. Geol. Surv. Canada Paper, 72-22, 44 p.

STEINHART, J. S. and SmitTH, T. J., ed. (1966). — The Earth beneath the Continents. Amer.
Geophys. Union, Monograph 10, 663 p. (20 papers on geophysical and geologic studies
of the Lake Superior region).

STOCKWELL, C. H., McGLynn, J. C., Emsiiz, R. F., SANForD, B. V., Norris, A. W.,
DonaLpson, J. A., FAHRIG, W. F. and Currie, K. L. (1970). — Geology of the Canadian
shield. In: Geology and Economic Minerals of Canada, R. J. W. Douglas, ed. Geol. Surv.
Canada, Economic Geology Report No. 1, 5th ed., 838 p.

Stoirer, R. E. and Davoison, E. S. (1959). — Amygdule mineral zoning in the Portage Lake
Lava Series, Michigan copper district. Econ. Geology, Vol. 54, p. 1250-1277, 1440-1460.

Turneaure, F. S. (1955). — Metallogenetic provinces and epochs. Econ. Geology, 50th Anniv.
Vol., p. 38-98.

Upapuyay, H. D. (1973). — Geological setting of the Betts Cove copper deposits, Newfound-
land: an example of ophiolite sulfide mineralization. Econ. Geology, Vol. 68, p. 161-167.

VoceL, T. A. and Eurticu, R. E. (1971). — A detailed petrographic, fabric, and chemical
analyses of the lower Nonesuch Shale. Progress report, White Pine Copper Co.

WeecgE, R. J. and Pottock, J. P. (1971). — Recent developments in the native-copper district
of Michigan. Guidebook for Field Conference, Michigan Copper District, Sept. 30-
Oct. 2, 1971, Society of Economic Geologists, p. 18-43.

Weece, R. J., Pottock, J. P. and the Calumet Division Geological Staff (1972). — The
geology of two new mines in the native copper district of Michigan. Econ. Geology,
Vol. 67, p. 622-633.

Wuite, D. E. (1968). — Environments of generation of some base-metal ore deposits. Econ.
Geology, Vol. 63, p. 301-335.

Waite, W. S. (1960a). — The Keweenawan lavas of Lake Superior, an example of flood
basalts. Amer. Jour. Sci., Vol. 25 8 A (Bradley volume), p. 367-374.

Wuite, W. S. (19606). — The White Pine copper deposit (discussion). Econ. Geology, Vol. 55,
p. 401-414.

Wurte, W. S. (1966). — Tectonics of the Keweenawan basin, western Lake Superior region.
U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Paper, 524, 23 p.

WuitE, W. S. (1968). — The native-copper deposits of Northern Michigan: Graton-Sales.
Volume 1. Ore Deposits of the United States 1933/1967. Am. Inst. Min. Met. Petr. Eng.,
Inc., N.Y., p. 308-325.

Wuirte, W. S. (1971a). — A paleohydrologic model for mineralization of the White Pine
copper deposit, Northern Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 66, p. 1-13.

Wuite, W. S. (19715). — Geologic setting of the Michigan copper district. Guidebook for
Field Conference, Michigan Copper District, Sept. 30-Oct. 2, 1971, Society of Economic
Geologists, p. 3-17.

Waite, W. S. (1972). — The base of the Upper Keweenawan, Michigan and Wisconsin. U.S.
Geol. Surv., Bull. 1354-F, 23 p.

Waite, W. S. and Wricut, J. C. (1954). — The White Pine copper deposit, Ontonagon
County, Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 49, p. 675-716.

Waite, W. S. and Wricut, J. C. (1960). — Lithofacies of the Copper Harbor conglomerate,
Northern Michigan. U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Paper, 400-B, p. 135-138.

Waite, W. S. and Wricut, J. C. (1966). — Sulfide-mineral zoning in the basal Nonesuch
Shale, Northern Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 61, p. 1171-1190.

Wiese, R. G., Jr. (1973). — Mineralogy and geochemistry of the Parting Shale, White Pine,
Michigan. Econ. Geology, Vol. 68, p. 317-331.

