===== page 1
CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE,
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 419-427

THE GITOLOGY OF SOME ADELAIDEAN
STRATIFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES

N. J. ROWLANDS (*)

ABSTRACT

The gitology of some Adelaidean stratiform copper occurrences is discussed and com-
pared with the bedded copper ores of Shaba Province, Zaire Republic. Both the Katanga and
Adelaidean System are of Upper Proterozoic Age.

Sedimentation in South Australia during the late Proterozoic (Adelaidean) was cyclic;
four major cycles are recognized. Conformable copper mineralization occurs at more than
one stratigraphic level in the Adelaidean System.

These congruent copper occurrences are in shallow marine sediments, deposited under an
arid climate in a lagoonal or marginal marine environment. The host sediments formed in
sinuous palaeolittoral zones and contain evidence of biological activity and associated reducing
conditions. The host rocks are quartz-feldspar clastic assemblages which are variably dolomitic,
argillaceous and carbonaceous.

Generally the copper mineralization occurs in transgressive marine sediments close to
underlying unconformities. The key to the understanding of these occurrences appears to lie in
a knowledge of the palaeogeography under which the host sediments were deposited.

The sulphides are a pyrite-chalcopyrite-chalcocite assemblage. Vertical sulphide mineral
zoning is very minor; lateral sulphide zoning is more common, and appears related to litho-
facies. Sulphides are finely disseminated, and intimately related to primary depositional
features.

The metamorphic grade at most of the occurrences is very low. However, at one, the host
rocks are now high grade metamorphics and here the metamorphism has produced a coarsely
crystalline sulphide assemblage.

Post depositional structures are not a major mineralization control. Syndepositional
structures are closely associated with the bedded copper mineralization.

With the exception of thin volcaniclastics and Jamprophyric dykes at one occurrence,
and minor alkali metasomatism at another; no known igneous activity is associated with
these occurrences.

Although many of these occurrences were the site of small gouging operations in high
grade secondary mineralization at the turn of the century, none supports a significant mining
operation.

INTRODUCTION

This paper describes the environmental setting of some stratiform copper
occurrences within the Adelaidean System (see fig. 1).

(*) Utah Development Company, Exploration Department, 167 Eagle Street, Brisbane,
4000, Australia.

===== page 2
PLACEFIX FOR ADELAIDEAN (LATE PROTEROZOIC) TIME
IN AUSTRALIA

 

 

 

ma a
a

=Sjareas OF ADELAIDEAN SEDIMENTATION-LARGELY MARINE

G
UJ avELAIDEAN TROUGH SEDIMENTS PCCTET TL ETe Sry
(ADELAIDEAN SYSTEM)

 

FHA ape aibeaN SHELF SEDIMENTS

& WILLOURAN VOLCANICS
xX STRATIFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES
|. YUDNAMUTANA
2.COPPER CLAIM
3.YADLAMALKA
4. KAPUNDA
5.DUTCHMANS
6.GUNSON
SCALE iN KILOMETRES
500, “1000 1500

 

Fic. 1

===== page 3
GITOLOGY OF SOME ADELAIDEAN STRATIFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES 421

“Adelaidean” is a time term used in Australia to cover the approximate range
1.4 to 0.6b.y.B.P. The term is derived from the Adelaidean System (a pile of
marine sediments deposited in this interval) although Adelaidean aged rocks are
widespread in Australia (fig. 1).

Rocks of the Adelaidean sedimentary stack were deposited in a bathy-
metrically shallow, intracratonic epeiric basin. These sediments were deposited
by four major cycles of sedimentation. They are now preserved in a north-south
trending orogenic belt (fig. 1).

Absence of turbidites, very subordinate vulcanism, and two distinct ice ages,
characterize the deposition of the Adelaidean System.

Widespread copper anomalism (in both vertical and lateral sense) is a feature
of the sediments in the Adelaidean palaeobasin.

Six specific examples of congruent cupriferous occurrences are used in this
paper to illustrate the spectrum of environments for bedded copper in Adelaidean

trata.

The geographic and stratigraphic localities of these six examples are shown in
figures 1 and 2 respectively.

Although this paper only cites evidence from these six occurrences, the
general environmental setting which emerges, applies to a host of other minor
Adelaidean stratiform copper occurrences. Where a gitological parameter is
specific to an occurrence, the name of that occurrence is shown in parenthesis.

Comparisons between the Katangian and Adelaidean Systems in relation to
stratiform copper are made.

SYNDEPOSITIONAL GITOLOGY

Cycle of sedimentation of host rocks. — Yudnamutana occurs in first cycle
sediments derived from pre-Adelaidean basement. Copper Claim and Gunson are
located near the unconformity separating first/second cycle Adelaidean strata.
Dutchmans, Yadlamalka, and Kapunda are well into second cycle sediments
(fig. 2).

Sedimentological analysis has shown that the copper mineralization is invariably
associated with a positively oscillating (transgressive) phase overlying a stillstand
(I-sequence). Generally, footwall strata are coarser clastics than the host rocks.
Hangingwall rocks encompass a wide textural and compositional range.

Palaeogeographic setting. — The host rocks for the six examples cited were
deposited in either the littoral zone, lagoons or deltas. The coarse clastics, detrital
felspars, development of pronounced lenticular interfingered facies patterns point
to water that was shallow, and fluctuating in level.

The biogenic features in the host rocks include stromatolites, framboidal pyrite
and generally high carbon content. Stromatolites are known from the Gunson and
Copper Claim sequences. Dutchmans mineralization occurs in a highly stroma-
tolitic stratigraphic unit. I regard the dolomitic rocks associated with the mineraliza-
tion as lithified organic-rich carbonate muds. Framboidal pyrite occurs in the cupri-
ferous rocks at Copper Claim (Pontifex, 1972), and carbonaceous material forms up
to 20 % of some of the host rocks at Copper Claim (Gransbury, 1973).

Sedimentary structures in the cupriferous horizons and associated rocks all
point to shallow water deposition. Common structures (except at the highly meta-

===== page 4
 

422 N. J. ROWLANDS

SCHEMATIC RECONSTRUCTION OF THE ADELAIDEAN INTRACRATONIC BASIN

STUART SHELF
MT. PAINTER BLOCK

Mth Tr see TTT
TT Tey y
SSK Re

>» = Sy

 

 

LOWER-MIDDLE CAMBRIAN

i FS |WILPENA GROUP

E2owserarana GROUP

[evra GROUP

INN

V7ZLoweR CALLANNA BEDS

+ |PRE ADELAIDEAN CRYSTALLINE BASEMENT

 

 

ADELAIDEAN

SYSTEM

 

 

LTs
~~ UNCON ORMITY/ DIscONFORMITY
ABLE CONTACT

EROUS HORIZONS

 

Fic, 2

morphosed Yudnamutana occurrence) are ripple marks, mud-cracks, cross-beds,
graded beds and algal evidence. Additionally a possible palaeochannel (+1 km
across) occurs at Yadlamalka.

Syndepositional tectonics such as slump breccias and clastic dykes (Copper
Claim) point to mild tectonic instability or deposition at a prograding delta front.

The otherwise flat floor of the depository was interrupted by some pronounced
submarine highs, thought to be due to block faulting of the pre-Adelaidean base-
ment. Such palaeohighs are interpreted at Copper Claim, Gunson, Yudnamutana.
At the time of the first major marine incursion the Adelaidean palaeobasin was
divided into several discrete depositories by these highs. At the time of deposition
of the cupriferous sediments some of these highs formed palaeoislands (fig. 2).

An arid palaeoclimate probably prevailed during formation of most of the
occurrences. This is suggested by halite and anhydrite casts, mud cracks, minor
aeolianites (at Yadlamalka), and red-bed strata (at Dutchmans).

Primary rock colours (except Dutchmans) are grey, black or green, suggesting
foul bottom euxinic conditions. Dutchmans occurs in a red-bed environment and
is possibly non-marine.

There is almost no evidence of igneous activity associated with mineralization.
For Copper Claim, possible palaeorifting and associated block faulting, together
with thin (20 cm) felsic pyroclastics points to a waning volcanic stage. Post-
Adelaidean alkalic ultrabasic dykes (Pontifex, 1973) intrude the host stratigraphy
at Copper Claim. At Yudnamutana post-Adelaidean potash metasomatism affects
some of the host stratigraphy, but appears unrelated to the copper mineralization
(Pontifex, 1973; Chuck, 1973; Kitch, 1973).

===== page 5
GITOLOGY OF SOME ADELAIDEAN STRATIFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES 423

Host lithology. — Host rocks are amphibolitic marbles and arenites (Yudna-
mutana); lithic arkoses (Gunson); carbonaceous arkosic siltstones (Kapunda);
carbonaceous dolo-siltites, carbonaceous dolo-arenites and volcaniclastic arenites
(Copper Claim); arkosic arenites (Yadlamalka); and lenticular arenaceous siltstones
locally known as “grey beds” (Dutchmans). Calcareous cement is a common litho-
logic feature.

The amphibolitic Yudnamutana host rock is regarded as the metamorphic
product of an original dolo-argillite.

Dolomitic host rocks are never pure dolomites. They are usually dark coloured,
reavely massive and fine grained, with bedding laminae from 0.2 mm to 3 cm
thick.

Argillaceous-siltstone host rocks constitute one of the better mineralized litho-
facies. They are generally carbonaceous (Copper Claim and Kapunda) and vary
from dolo-siltites to argillaceous siltites. Highly fissile black graphitic shales (Cop-
per Claim) rich in sericite, form a local minor constituent of some mineralized
strata. The siltites and dolomites interfinger with each other. Roth have suffered
soft-sediment deformation.

The arenaceous host rocks carry the best grades of copper; the texture varies
from fine grained (Kapunda, Dutchmans and Yadlamalka) to conglomeratic
(Gunson, Copper Claim). Some have a pyroclastic component (Copper Claim)
others contain lithic fragments (Gunson and Dutchmans).

The most favourable host lithology appears to be a fine grained carbonaceous
dolo-arenite.

All host rocks are generally sericitic and chloritic.

Mineralogy-zonation. — From the bottom to the top of the Adelaidean sedi-
mentary stack there is a zonation from copper to lead-zinc mineralization. This
culminates in the widespread lead-zinc mineralization associated with the basal
Palaeozoic marine transgression that overlies Adelaidean strata (fig. 2).

Base metals and gold are concentrated in the central and eastern portions of
the palaeotrough. This clustering is thought to reflect proximity to source areas.

Gunson shows a vertical and lateral zoning from copper to lead-zinc mineraliza-
tion. Copper mineralization generally gives way vertically to pyrite. Lateral mineral
zoning (controlled by lithofacies changes) from pyrite through chalcopyrite to
chalcocite is shown at all the occurrences under discussion. Chalcopyrite is the
most common copper sulphide species.

Primary mineralization. — In the hypogene zone mineralization consists of
pyrite-chalcopyrite-chalcocite.

Pyrite is the most common sulphide species. It has the following modes of occur-
rence: As blebs in carbonate concretions within the carbonaceous shales. As detrital
disseminations in silty beds at the base of graded silty-shaley beds. As coarse (up to
2 cm across) pyritohedrons in discordant and congruent (diagenetic?) quartz-calcite
veins. As minute disseminations in black graphitic-argillites, dolo-argillites, and
carbonaceous silty dolo-arenites. Pyrite mineralization occurs in disseminations in
association with chalcopyrite. Thin section work has recognized framboidal pyrite
in some of the more finely disseminated mineralization.

The chalcopyrite mineralization has two modes of occurrence. Firstly, as fine
disseminations, which are difficult to see with the naked eye unless the core or hand
specimen is wet, or has been cut and polished. These disseminations are in contrast

===== page 6
424 N. J, ROWLANDS

to pyrite, in that they have irregular grain boundaries. The pyrite usually shows
moderate to good euhedral form. Chalcopyrite disseminations are most commonly
associated with dolo-arenites and dolo-siltites. Fine disseminations are the most
common mode of chalcopyrite occurrence.

Secondly, chalcopyrite occurs as coarsely recrystallized (up to 2 cm) grains in
congruent and discordant quartz-carbonate veins. These recrystallized grains are
highly irregular in shape, which is in marked contrast to the pyritohedral pyrite in
these veins. At the highly metamorphosed Yudnamutana occurrence, sulphide
grains are up to 5 cm across (Chuck, 1973).

Secondary mineralization. — Sulphides almost never occur in outcrop. Super-
gene mineralogy consists of pyrite, limonite pseudomorphs after pyrite, malachite,
azurite, cuprite and native copper. At Kapunda the bedded zone contains abundant
chalcocite (after pyrite and subordinate chalcopyrite). At Yudnamutana supergene
chalcocite after chalcopyrite is known. Gossans on these occurrences are rare.

A gossan (Yudnamutana) that I have studied could be described as follows.
Original sulphides are extensively replaced by limonite. Pseudomorphous replicas
of pyrite are common. Chalcopyrite occurs as anhedral grains in limonitized frac-
tures. Chalcopyrite in limonite is invariably altered and largely replaced by digenite
and covellite. Rarely, chalcopyrite grains may have a core of pyrrhotite indicating
replacement of pyrrhotite by chalcopyrite.

Drilling has indicated weathering depths in excess of 200 metres. Electron probe
analyses on rocks from this weathered zone have shown copper contained in the
chlorite lattice (Cooper et al., 1973).

Controls of sulphide distribution. — The following are some of the controls
of sulphide distribution that I have recorded in the mineralized strata.

Both detrital pyrite and chalcopyrite occur along foreset laminae of cross-
bedded arenites. The grain size of the chalcopyrite is extremely fine, but tends to
be coarser in coarser grained host rocks. Chalcopyrite is more abundant in the
coarser, basal portions of graded beds.

Soft sediment deformation (such as clastic dyking) has redistributed chalco-
pyrite, indicating that the chalcopyrite predates this pre-lithification deformation.

Syn-sedimentary structures such as scours and cut-and-fill structures have
sulphides in the fill material.

Bedding exercises a striking and precise control on sulphide distribution.

Congruent and discordant quartz-carbonate veins are a feature of some miner-
alized horizons. Some of these veins contain coarsely crystalline sulphides, whereas
others, although penetrating mineralized laminae, are quite barren.

Postdepositional gitology. — The Adelaidean System is a miogeoclinal sedi-
mentary prism deposited peripheral to cratonic elements. Rifting of the palaeo-
cratons probably initiated sedimentation.

Two phases of mild tectonism (Musgravian and Sturtian) deformed the sedi-
mentary pile while it was being deposited. Lower Palaeozoic orogenesis folded
Adelaidean strata to produce the Flinders, Mt. Lofty and Willouran Ranges.

No major structural controls have been observed for the copper mineralization,
although faulting (Kapunda) obviously displaces cupriferous stratigraphy. Tec-
tonism must increase the inherent porosity of host rocks and may have provided
extra “plumbing” for relocation of mineralization by groundwater.

Gunson is not folded. Copper Claim has a conical style of folding (Kitch,

===== page 7
GITOLOGY OF SOME ADELAIDEAN STRATIFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES 425

1973). The other occurrences have a cylindrical similar style of folding, with a
sub-diapiric disharmonic style at Yudnamutana.

At Yudnamutana host rocks have reached the amphibolite facies of meta-
morphism. The other examples are either unmetamorphosed (Gunson) or may just
have reached the lower greenschist facies.

Diagenesis probably concentrated mineralization in minor lateral secretion
carbonate veins. Diagenesis also resulted in upgrading of montmorillinite to
chlorite-illite with concomitant expulsions of complexed copper from the mont-
morillinite lattice.

ADELAIDEAN/KATANGIAN COMPARISONS

Figure 3 shows one interpretation of the Late Proterozoic palaeogeography of
Gondwanaland; the relative positions of the Adelaidean and Katangian Systems
are indicated.

I have used the two Late Precambrian ice ages to make the time equivalance
statement of figure 4.

There is probably no other time in geological history for which evidence of
almost world-wide glaciation is so strong. Harland (1959) ascribes this widespread
occurrence of drift tillites in the Upper Proterozoic to a unique configuration of
the continents that allowed drift ice to reach equatorial regions; however, it still
seems simpler to suppose that the climate change recorded by the tillites was
intense and worldwide in its effects.

Attempts to dress the history of Late Precambrian depositories in suits of
modern plate tectonic clothes seem to result in some unhappy fits and some stretch-
ing at the seams. I suggest that even in the Late Precambrian crust and mantle
were not differentiated sufficiently to produce “thick” rigid plates requiring sub-
duction at one locality to compensate for rifting at another. Rather the dominant
style of Precambrian tectonism was universally rifting (Hutchinson, R. W., pers.
com., 1973).

Both the Adelaidean and Katangian sedimentary prisms are the product of
intracratonic depositories. There is evidence for the development, globally, of con-
ditions that allowed the accumulation of very large quantities of copper in sedi-
ments (fig. 4). I suggest it is likely this coincides with changes that are part of a
general pattern in atmospheric, biogenic and crustal evolution.

What exactly those changes were I do not claim to understand, but they led to
the deposition, in quiescent, marginal marine, reduzate stable-shelf environments
peripheral to cratonic nuclei, of cupriferous sediments. The climate was arid and
the deposition followed a prolonged period of weathering. Generally speaking
(and particularly in the Katangian and Adelaidean Systems) there was a lack of
volcanic activity, and subsequent levels of metamorphism developed were only
very low (i.e. the deposition zone did not subsequently as part of its development,
become a subduction zone). Diapirism is a feature of both Supergroups.

The Eh-pH physico-chemical barrier where continental waters meet marine
waters in the palaeolittoral zone, coupled with facies changes appears to be the
most consistent environmental “thread” linking the cupriferous horizons in both
Supergroups, as well as those in Russia, Northwestern America, Rhodesia, Zambia
and Southwestern Africa (fig. 4).

===== page 8
426 N. J. ROWLANDS

LATE PRE-CAMBRIAN DEPOSITIONAL TROUGHS
GONDWANALAND

@ | ADELAIDEAN PALAEOTROUGH

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ZAIREAN/ZAMBIAN COPPER BELT

 

 

EA AREAS OF LATE PROTEROZOIC
AMARINE SEDIMENTATION

 

Ejouver PROTEROZOIC & ARCHEAN|

APPROX EXTENT OF STRETCHES
USED FOR FITTING

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fic. 3

CORRELATION OF SOME

NORTH-WEST SOUTH-WEST
es ZAMBIA RHODESIA | RAGE

 

UPPER by KUNDELUNGU
WINDERMERE YY KUNDELUNGU SUPERIEUR A WILPEMA
TT" KUNDELUNGU
MIDDLE (MOYEN) SCHWARZ = 5
HORSETHIEF KUNDELUNGU PETIT RAND MARINOAN
FORMATION (TILLITICD CONGLOMERATE SIVIRIRA TILLITES TILLITES
eee ee Ne ates aie eae et a mn a ms fe ae ES SN
MULDEN UMBERATANA
KUNDELUNGU SANDSTONE SERIES i eeroue
LOWER INFERIEUR
KUNDELUNGU

SYSTEM

TSUMEB
STAGE

OTAVI ~  STURTIAN

_—-———4)
TILLITE TILLITES

GRAND
(TILLITICY CONGLOMERATE PIBLWLR!
(TILLITICD

MWASHIA [Nountan |

MOUNTAIN.

arour SANDSTONE
. SERIES,

OTAVI SERIES.

UPPER ROAN SERIES DES ARGILLACEOUS
GRouP Y SERIES
CALLANNA

FORMATION
BEDS

JNERALISATION®

RAVALLI Y Lower ROAN ARENACEOUS
@rouP A GROUP SERIES 7

 

 

LOWER BELT

 

Fic. 4

===== page 9
GITOLOGY OF SOME ADELAIDEAN STRATJFORM COPPER OCCURRENCES 427

To date the only major difference between Adelaidean and Katangian rocks is
the presence, in the second, of major stratiform copper orebodies; I predict that in
time this difference will also be removed.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I thank Utah Development Company for allowing me the permission, time and
opportunity to both prepare and present this paper.

Thanks are due to my colleagues Bob Kitch, Graeme Chuck, Andrew Drum-
mond, Neil Stuart and Alan Hitchcox whose work has contributed to my under-
Standing of these copper occurrences. Vic Chamagne drafted the figures and pre-
pared the slides.

Special thanks are due to Oliver Warin, who checked the manuscript, and who
conceived the Utah stratiform copper search.

References

Cuuck, R. G. (1973). — U.D.C. Special Report No. 214. Unpublished Company Exploration
Progress Report.

Cooper, R. S. and HENLEY, K. J. (1973). — Amdel Mineralogical Report No. MP 3602/73.
Unpublished U.D.C. Report. .

Ferreira, E D, (1972). Carta Tectonica do Brasil. Nota Explicativa Republica Federativa do
Brasil. Bol. No. 1.

Granspury, R. J. (1973). Unpublished Geophysics Hons. Thesis. University of Adelaide. .

Harvanp, W. B. and Bincoop, D. E. T. (1959). — Palaeomagnetism in some Norwegian
Sparagmites and the Late Precambrian Ice Age. Nature, Vol. 184, Suppl. 24, No. 4702,
p. 1215-1240.

Kitcu, R. B. (1972-1973). — U.D.C. Special Report Nos. 199 and 212. Unpublished Company
Exploration Progress Reports.

Krason, J. (1967). — Perm Synkliny Boleslawieckiej (Dolny Slask) Prace Wroclawskiego
Towarzystwa Naukowego. Serial B, No. 137, 151 p.

Martin, H. (1965). — The Precambrian Geology of S.W.A. and Namaqualand P.R.U.
University of Capetown, 159 p.

Pontirex, I. R. (1972). — McPhar Mineralogical Reports Nos. 806, 819, 992, 1058, 1322,
1043, 1262, 938, 968, 1052, 1090, 1322, 1114, 1093. Unpublished U.D.C. Reports.

Rowtanps, N. J. (1972-1973). — U.D.C. Special Reports Nos, 181, 183, 184, 185, 207, 213.
Unpublished Company Exploration Progress Reports.

Row anps, N. J. (1973). — The Adelaidean System of South Australia: A Review of its
Sedimentation Tectonics and Copper Occurrences. Idaho Bureau of Mines and Geology:
Belt Symposium. Vol. 1, p. 80-108.

Row.anps, N. J. (1964). — The Geology of the Area West of Meyers Pool, Rhodesia. Un-
published U.C.R.N. Honours Thesis.

===== page 10
Imprimé en Belgique

