===== page 1
 

CENTENAIRE DE LA SOCIETE GEOLOGIQUE DE BELGIQUE
GISEMENTS STRATIFORMES ET PROVINCES CUPRIFERES, LIEGE, 1974, 215-233

 

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES
IN THE ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT

P. L. Brnpa (*) and J. R. MuLGREw (**)

ABSTRACT

Stratigraphic work still in progress has resulted in a revised correlation of the Lower
Roan from Chililabombwe to Luanshya. The Upper Roan/Lower Roan boundary has been
redefined at several localities and an attempt has been made to correlate the Lower Roan
across the Kafue Anticline. At the regional scale, the stratiform nature of major and minor
copper occurrences 1s highlighted. Not only the prominent orebodies but also anomalous
copper values can be correlated over a large area. A sedimentary model emphasizing the
close association of ore occurrences with transgressions of the Katanga sea is proposed.

INTRODUCTION

The Zambian Copperbelt is part of a larger mineral province which includes
Shaba (Zaire) and also large areas in the Northwestern Province of Zambia. Late
Precambrian metasediments which have been correlated with the Katanga rocks and
are reputed to be of some economic interest are present to the West in Angola and
to the Northeast in the Northern Province of Zambia. Some copper-bearing Late
Precambrian metasediments of South-West Africa may be part of the same
province (Clifford, 1962; van Eden and Binda, 1972).

The Copperbelt deposits have long been known as classical examples of strati-
form orebodies, and are well documented in detailed accounts of the individual
mines. The main aims of this paper are:

1. To present a revised stratigraphic correlation, which is the preliminary out-
come of stratigraphic studies involving R.C.M. and N.C.C.M. geologists.

2. To discuss some regional aspects of stratigraphic distribution of copper
occurrences.

3. To summarize the results of some research carried out in the Copperbelt in
the last decade. Some of this information has already been published, but much

(*) Roan Consolidated Mines Limited, R.C.M. Geological Services, Geologic Research
Department, P.O. Box 1, Kalulushi, Zambia.

(**) Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Limited, Konkola Division, Geology Depart-
ment, P.O. Box 1, Chililabombwe, Zambia.

===== page 2
216 P. L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

of it remains in company reports which are normally not available to the scientific
community.

STRATIGRAPHY

The Roan Group is the lower subdivision of the Late Precambrian Katanga
Sequence which covers a large area of Zambia and Zaire. The term Katanga
Sequence (Binda and van Eden, 1972) is used here in preference to Katanga System
(Mendelsohn, 1961) and to Katangan (Cahen and Lepersonne, 1967). Isotopic ages
indicate that the Katanga Sequence was deposited before 620 m.yr. ago, and that
the Lower Roan is older than 840 m.yr. and younger than 1,300 m.yr. (Cahen,
1970). In Zambia, the Katanga Sequence is subdivided from top to bottom into
Kundelungu, Mwashia, and Roan groups (see insert in fig. 1).

The Roan Group is generally subdivided into a predominantly dolomitic Upper
Roan, 500 to 800 m thick, and a predominantly clastic Lower Roan, up to 1,000 m
thick (Mendelsohn, 1961). The term Mine Series is used in Zambia for the strata
comprising Mwashia, Upper Roan, and Lower Roan (Gray, 1930), whereas in
Zaire the term Série des Mines (now Mines Group) refers to the lithostratigraphic
unit between the R.A.T. (Roches argilo-talqueuses) and the Dipeta Group (Bartho-
lomé et al., 1973). It is proposed to abandon the term Mine Series (or Group) in
Zambia to avoid confusion.

LOWER ROAN

The Lower Roan predominantly comprises clastic metasediments with minor
dolomites towards the top. The Luanshya terminology has been used here since it
is the most informal and also perhaps the best known. Work aimed at detailed
correlation and standardization of stratigraphic terms in the Copperbelt is in
progress. This wil] entail discarding the existing nomenclature which is confused
by parochial terms largely related to mining (see figs. 2 and 3).

The present lack of chronostratigraphic horizons in the Roan Group necessitates
reliance on lithostratigraphy. The Lower Roan/Upper Roan boundary has caused
considerable confusion owing to the arbitrary choice of the point where the section
changes from “predominantly clastic” to “predominantly dolomitic.” Detailed
correlation by Mulgrew (1968 and 1972) from Chililabombwe to Luanshya (Ore
Shale Alignment of fig. 1) has indicated that a natural boundary exists as shown in
figure 2. In extending this correlation to other parts of the Copperbelt, it must be
accepted that the Upper Roan/Lower Roan boundary can be diachronous owing to
facies changes.

The Lower Roan can be subdivided from base to top as follows:

RL 7 (Footwall Formation)

At Luanshya, this stratigraphic unit includes all the metasediments between the
basal Katanga unconformity and the Ore Shale (RL 6). The Footwall formation,

===== page 3
STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 217

KATANGA SEQUENCE IN THE
ZAMBIAN COPPERBELT

KUNDELUNGU

GREAT
CONGLOMERATE
at : : (TILLITE)
i n MWASHIA
ran aomewe NORTH I: 2
sourn

UPPER ROAN

LOWER ROAN

BASEMENT F.
COMPLEX

 

KILOMETRES
MINDOLA 7 ae 0 20

‘CHIBULUMA KITE

Ons HD

LUSH 7, feSOUTH OREBODY Aes fr
: @ “A é: EE] ratayga one
i. “ A amphnbolite
%y, - 2 \ Ny BASEMENT
% ro ‘COMPLEX:
‘
‘.
uss

  

Fic. 1. — Map of the Zambian Copperbelt and generalized stratigraphy of the Katanga
Sequence.

having been deposited on a rugged topography, varies considerably in thickness
from several hundred metres in the valleys to nil over paleogeographic highs.

The predominant lithologic types are coarse-grained clastics with very little
argillite, and virtually no carbonates. Correlation of individual units within the
Footwall formation is uncertain owing to the local control which Basement hills of
varied rock types exercised on sedimentation. The following generalized succession
can be recognized at most localities along the Ore Shale Alignment.

Basal Conglomerate (Boulder Conglomerate). — The Basal Conglomerate is
extremely variable in thickness, poorly sorted and is generally interpreted as a
scree deposit, whereas metasediments above it may have more distant sources,
e.g. Nchanga (Binda, 1972a).

Footwall Quartzites. — Above the Basal Conglomerate, or directly overlying
the Basement Complex, are a few hundred metres of micaceous quartzites and
“clean” felspathic quartzites. The latter often. exhibit large-scale cross-bedding
which is interpreted by Mendelsohn (in. Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 41) as eolian in

===== page 4
218 P, L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

origin. At places, however, the eolian origin of these quartzites is in doubt
(van Eden and Binda, 1972).

Second Conglomerate. — A lenticular second conglomerate, poorly sorted
and containing pebbles and cobbles of various Basement lithologies, occurs at
about the same stratigraphic level in most localities from Chililabombwe to
Luanshya. Although not correlatable in detail, these occurrences suggest higher
energy conditions over a large area in the Copperbelt at about the same time.

The Second Conglomerate is overlain by pink to greyish, medium-grained,
felspathic and micaceous metasandstones. Small-scale cross-bedding and thin layers
of sandy argillite occur locally and may indicate fluviatile conditions.

Footwall Conglomerate and Sandstone. — Sandstones and conglomeratic lenses
directly underlie the Ore Shale. A footwall conglomerate is normally present along
the Ore Shale Alignment, but always as discontinuous lenses in sandstone.

Mendelsohn (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 351) interpreted the Footwall Con-
glomerate in the eastern part of Luanshya as a series of shoestring conglomerates
parallel to an ancient shoreline and stepping down stratigraphically towards the
northwest. A marine transgression marks the end of RL7 sedimentation in the
Copperbelt, therefore beach deposits are to be expected towards the top of the
RL 7. However, McKenzie (1968) and Binda (1969a) showed that, in two small
areas in Luanshya, the Footwall Conglomerate was deposited in a high-energy
fluviatile environment with current directions towards the south.

Footwall Formation at Mufulira. — At Mutfulira, the beds between the base of
the “C” horizon (fig. 3) and the Basement Complex have been subdivided by
van Eden (1969) and Hodgson (1969) into a lower and upper Footwall separated
by a marked truncation plane which is interpreted as a regional disconformity.
Wedges of unsorted conglomerate mark the basal unconformity at a few places.
A grey quartzite displaying large-scale cross-bedding is the predominant lithotype
of the lower Footwall. This quartzite has been interpreted as wind-deposited by
Garlick (1967) and Maree (1962), but van Eden (1972) found no clear evidence for
eolian origin. Above the grey quartzite, and locally interfingering with it, are cross-
bedded reddish grits and quartzites of aqueous origin.

The Mufulira Footwall succession is not easily correlatable with that of the
Ore Shale Alignment; an alluvial-fan conglomerate in the lower part of the “C”
horizon (van Eden, 1970) may be equivalent to the Footwall Conglomerate. Uni-
modal current directions from north to south in this conglomerate are consistent
with the general transport direction for other areas of the Copperbelt.

RL 6 (Ore Shale)

The Ore Shale is a remarkably persistent horizon that can be traced from
Chililabombwe to Luanshya, a distance of approximately 100 km. It is a grey-
green, silty argillite, 5 to more than 50 m thick, passing laterally to a black,
carbonaceous argillite. Vertical and horizontal variations in lithology have been
observed both regionally and locally; a carbonate-rich facies is generally present at
the base, and anhydrite concretions are often present near the top.

At Nkana (Kitwe) and Chililabombwe, the Ore Shale is divided into several
sub-units. At Luanshya, the RL 6 is sub-divided in two units: a lower argillaceous

===== page 5
219

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA

SISSIIND © SLSIHOS
SHINYYD

 

eG suvuan079N0D Isve

uziwwno 8
“| savzcsvn0 snozovriow

Feed suvuswo19No9 aNozas

S3IZL¥¥ND snoIovTIOW

fesse] _2vusw079N02 Tr~ML00s

suINvHD 49
Gs0NWIN! 1SIHOS NENINT

“VLYWIWOTONOD TwSvE

UIZLBYND TIVMLO04

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NouIsNvEL T¥MLOOs

JNOLSONYS

aiesewo/6u0) samo7
Thwms003

ouorspues sony
siesauso/Bu09 j1e61003

 

aINYHD

JUIZLYND SLSIHOS

zezamoroen Lan

2252] zvazwo10w09 Wwsve

SUIzLW~ND TIvML004
41v¥3WOTNO 378809
aumngdy 8 as0KNy
2LYYIWOTONOD T1¥AALOO:

 

 

 

FTWHS 340

 

IVS 340

JLINYHD wONMHON
SSIIND 8 SLSIHDS NENENT

s1v43H079N09 TSYE

spremanos Apiiey us svn) woe

asoxuy

JNOLSONYS NOILISNYEL
Srziuwno NOWISNVEL
BIVHS O20NVE_¥IMOT

 

 

 

 

 

AWANdHOd WISYTIOW AB
Q3ONYINI SIND 9 SLSHOS

anawasva
SUVUINO19NOD evo waMOT
nc ‘vow wzMO7

on
OMNES 31VEBHOTONOD 378834
3L¥BIWOTONOD SNOWOd ¥IMOT

HUZLUND TIvAALOOS

JLWAINOTONOD WaXUYV *

aNOLSONYS sno3av TINNY
Buvu3M0TON0D snowod
JNOLSaNWS TIVM1004
BLNEIWOTONOD TTVML003
FIWHS 340

 

 

 

 

SIITIONY TM ONIDNYH

SINIWIOIS 82LYA VIN

1961 wyosjepuoy

 

JUIZLIYNO INH

HUTLUEND wadan

 

 

 

| FUZLIYNO Wadd

FONINDIS ILITHOWW I1LMOT0T

 

 

 

Se
BLIOTO0 WILYM Hd

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VAHSNYN1

SINIWIORS 43LYM Us

 

 

 

 

 

NOL” PWAOS HILYM ws YLT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(YNVIN) 3AALIN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IHSIGINVHD

—~
Fmwov00 Asw3H9

NOU WHINOS 310N0100

 

(wamor} 3NOLSaWYS o3aWva
aMuVW TIVHS / FLIZLYYNO ANI

BUZLMNND owLwasTz4 IHL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

JUZLHVAID TIvMONONEH

¥24n0v TIYMONIONYH

4099) HAIMA 3T0HS.

vow vamo7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VONVHIN — VIOSNIHD

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Zé MalBW NVON waaan

=| 3110100 NwOw waddN

WH

aMSWOSVTITIHD

 

Fic. 2. -~ Stratigraphic correlation of the Lower Roan along the Ore Shale Alignment.

===== page 6
220 P. L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

dolomite passing laterally to a calcite-biotite-tremolite schist to the west, and an
upper sandy and silty argillite becoming somewhat finer grained and scapolitic,
to the west (Mendelsohn, in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 351).

Annels (1972) describes a lateral facies change within the Ore Shale in the
Luanshya and Chambishi basins: a silty argillite to the northeast (Luanshya, Min-
dola, Chambishi), a carbonaceous argillite to the southwest (Nkana South Orebody,
eastern edge of Chibuluma, northwestern margin of the Chambishi basin), and a
transitional facies separating the two.

The Ore Shale equivalent in the Mufulira syncline is here interpreted to be the
section between the base of the “C” and the top of the “B” horizons (fig. 3).
“C” and “B” wackes, arenites, dolomites, and argillites can be explained as near-
shore, coarser-grained facies of the Ore Shale. On lithologic criteria, the lower
boundary of the RL 6 equivalent at Mufulira could be taken at the base of the
Mudseam (Inter “B-C”). However, the abrupt change from the cross-bedded
(fluviatile?) grits of the footwall to the marine arenites of the “C” horizon
(van Eden, 1972) can be equated with the marine transgression at the base of the
Ore Shale. Supporting evidence for lithostratigraphic correlation of the “B-C”
sequence with the RL6 is that in both units it is the lowest occurrence, in the
Katanga Sequence, of bedded carbonates and stromatolites. Stromatolites have been
described from the Inter “B-C” beds at Mufulira (Malan, 1964) and have recently
been identified at the same stratigraphic horizon in drillcores from the Ndola area.
In the Chambishi-Nkana basin, stromatolites and biohermal carbonates occur at
several localities in the Ore Shale (Annels, 1972; Clemmey, pers. comm.).

Southwest of the Luanshya-Chililabombwe alignment, the Ore Shale and the
upper part of the Lower Roan pinch out, and dolomitic metasediments of Upper
Roan affinity directly overlie Footwall clastics. At the eastern edge of the Chi-
buluma mining area, a pyritic carbonaceous argillite that correlates with the Ore
Shale at nearby Nkana can still be recognized; further to the west, however, the
Ore Shale pinches out and dolomite, amphibolite, and albite-chlorite rocks overlie
the sandstone and conglomerate.

In the Nchanga-Chingola region, the strata between the base of the Lower
Banded Shale (Ore Shale) and the Felspathic Quartzite are about 80 m thick.
Further to the southeast, along strike, this part of the succession thins to 8 m of
dolomitic quartz-micaschist and the Lower Banded Shale cannot be distinguished.
Further west, the Felspathic Quartzite rests directly on rocks which are reliably
assigned to the Footwall.

These relationships are consistent with a rapid northeasterly transgression of
the Katanga sea at the onset of Ore Shale deposition. The area to the southwest of
Kalulushi was too far from the shoreline to receive much clastic material and
mainly carbonates were deposited throughout the time of deposition of the upper
part of the Lower Roan. Unfortunately, thick but irregular bodies of amphibolite
obscure the sedimentary record in this area.

RL 5 (Hangingwall Formation)

The RL 5 includes the units from the top of the Ore Shale (RL 6) to the base
of the white dolomite (RL 4). Predominantly. arenaceous, the unit is characterized
by numerous alternations of arenites and argillites, becoming more dolomitic and
schistose- towards the top. Several arkosic: beds :provide- useful local markers, but a

===== page 7
 

 

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 221

MUFULIRA
(generalized) NE.

ORE-SHALE ALIGNMENT [Z| uPren Do.omiTe

SW. (generalized) INTERBEDDED SHALE
ou p AND QUARTZITE

RUT (RU2?)
BLUE SHALE

UPPER INTERMEDIATE
DOLOMITE

AL3, SHALE
WITH GRIT,
SANDY. TALC
SCHIST

 

 

MIDOLE QUARTZITE

 

LOWER INTERMEDIATE
DOLOMITE

IMENDELSOHN, 1961),

 

GLASSY QUARTZITE

RL4_. CHINGOLA
DOLOMITE, CHERTY
DOLOMITE UPPER ARGILLACEOUS
QUARTZITE

MARKER GAIT
90° Dolomite

UPPER ARGILLACEOUS

T.F.Q.,UPPER
oer QUARTZITE

QUARTZITE
ALS

‘A’ ARENITE AND WACKE
HANGING WALL - Biases
UARTZITE. _ 20-4) INTER ‘A.B’ QUARTZITE

MASSIVE SHALE
LOWER DOLOMITE

Gritty Marker

ORE SHALE
‘B’ ARENITE AND WACKE

Algal Dolomite INTER “8-C°

 

‘C’ ARENITE AND WACKE

RL7, FOOTWALL

UPPER FOOTWALL

LOWER FOOTWALL

 

BASEMENT
COMPLEX BASEMENT COMPLEX

 

 

 

Fic. 3. — Stratigraphic correlation of the Lower Roan across the Kafue Anticline.

===== page 8
222 P.L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

conspicuous arkose unit (T.F.Q., Upper Quartzite, etc., in fig. 2) can be traced from
Chililabombwe to Luanshya. In Luanshya there is a marked lateral change in the
RL5 : mainly arkose alternating with gritty argillite in the east, less sandy and
more dolomitic (and anhydritic) towards the west. It should be noted that the
Felspathic Quartzite of Chingola (Nchanga) is here correlated with the Luanshya
Marker Quartzite, and not with the RL 3 as in Mendelsohn (1961).

A correlation of the RL 5 with the Mufulira succession can be attempted on
the basis of tectono-sedimentary events which can be interpolated across the Kafue
Anticline. At the top of the Ore Shale there is a gradual coarsening of grain size
heralding the hangingwall arenites. These arenites, often cross-bedded and with
basal scour features can be interpreted as having been deposited during a regression
of the Katanga sea. At Mufulira, evidence of uplift and regressive conditions can
be found in the Inter “A-B” quartzite and grit: overlying the Lower Dolomite are
some remarkable examples of pre-consolidation slumping in the Massive Shale
(Brandt et al., in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 411) followed upwards by a coarse arkose
displaying some distinct fluviatile cross-bedding. A convenient upper boundary of
the RL 5 equivalent at Mufulira is the top of the Glassy Quartzite (fig. 3).

RL 4 (Chingola Dolomite)

The RL 4 is a 13 to 35 m thick, white to yellowish-brown dolomite with one
or two thin beds of argillite towards the top. This unit persists, virtually unchanged
in its main characters from Luanshya to Chililabombwe. At each mine it con-
stitutes an important aquifer, if not the principal one, and is known by a variety
of local names (fig. 2). The lateral continuity of the Cherty Dolomite with the
shale marker near the top, has already been stressed by Hoffman (1967). In
Mendelsohn (1961) the Chingola Dolomite, Cherty Dolomite, and Far Water
Dolomite were correlated with the Upper Roan of Luanshya, and not with the
RL 4 (Lower Roan) as in this paper (fig. 2).

At Mufulira, and along the whole of the Mufulira-Ndola strike, the litho-
stratigraphic equivalent of the RL 4 is tentatively taken as the Lower Intermediate
Dolomite (fig. 3), also the local major aquifer.

RL 3 and Shale with Grit

At Luanshya, the RL 3 consists of more than 100 m of coarse arkose and con-
glomerate, becoming more argillaceous towards the west. This coarse facies at the
top of the Lower Roan in Luanshya has long represented an obstacle to a correct
correlation of the Roan Group in the Copperbelt. Mulgrew (1972) observed from
the Konkola Dome to Chililabombwe, a lateral facies change from a Luanshya-
type arkose to the gritty argillite which is the more common lithotype of the
uppermost Lower Roan in the Copperbelt. Mulgrew therefore correlated the RL 3
with: Shale with Grit (Chililabombwe), Argillite (Chingola), Sandy Talc Schist
(Chambishi), Far Water Grits and Argillites (Nkana) as shown in figure 2. The
coarse arkose is probably a facies deposited near the basin edges during a major
uplift, while argillites with lenses of coarse sand represent the basinal facies.

===== page 9
STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 223

COPPER OCCURRENCES

The relationships between copper occurrences and stratigraphy are discussed
at three scales: megascale (regional and large stratigraphic units), mesoscale (single
mining property and small stratigraphic units), microscale (from single exposure to
microscopic observation).

Copper occurrences include not only orebodies, but also sub-economic mineral-
ization and some geochemical copper anomalies which are at least one order of
magnitude above the background. In rocks of the Roan Group, the background
Copper values are in the order of 10 to 30 ppm as determined by routine A.A.S.
methods.

MEGASCALE

At the megascale, the stratigraphic control of copper occurrences is remarkable.
The following points serve to highlight this control:

1. Ore occurrences are restricted to Lower Roan rocks: nearly all of the
Zambian copper is mined from approximately the middle portion of the Lower
Roan, from about the Cobble Conglomerate (in the RL 7) to the base of the
Chingola Dolomite (RL 4). In a sedimentary column 1 000 to 1500 m thick, ore-
bodies, and also most of the anomalous values, are confined to a well defined
150-200 m thick stratigraphic interval. The only notable exceptions are the various
copper occurrences in rocks of the pre-Katanga Basement Complex (Pienaar, in
Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 30). Some of these lesser occurrences have been interpreted
by Mendelsohn (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 140) as the product of downward percola-
tion from overlying mineralized Lower Roan rocks. Voet and Freeman (1972)
have recorded primary copper sulphides in Basement rocks at Chingola and inter-
preted them as the remnants of the copper lodes which provided a source for some
Lower Roan orebodies.

2. There is a distinct regional-stratigraphic pattern in the distribution of the
orebodies. The Zambian Copperbelt can be sub-divided into three sub-parallel belts
striking northwest-southeast (fig. 1).

To the extreme southwest is a belt in which economic copper mineralization is
restricted to arenites older than the Ore Shale. Examples of those orebodies are
Chibuluma and Chibuluma West, Mimbula and Fitula, and a few relatively small
deposits which are being explored south of Kalulushi. In these areas the Ore Shale
is absent or represented by argillite which can be pyritic and carbonaceous as in
Chibuluma, or phyllitic and quartzitic as at Mimbula and Fitula. This mineraliza-
tion is, however, not restricted to the belt indicated in figure 1, but encroaches onto
other areas (e.g. Footwall orebodies at Chambishi and Nkana).

The central belt is the Ore Shale Alignment and constitutes a most spectacular
example of stratiform orebodies stretching over a strike-distance of more than
one hundred kilometres from Musoshi, in Shaba, to Luanshya. Along this belt the
Katanga metasediments are preserved from erosion in separate structural basins
(fig. 1). The orebodies are confined to the 5 to 50 m thick Ore Shale, except at
Nchanga where orebodies occur locally in most of the Lower Roan succession up to

===== page 10
224 P.L, BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

the Chingola Dolomite (RL 4). More than one half of the Zambian copper is mined
from this alignment. The Ore Shale is not of ore grade along the whole of the
strike, but its copper content is always at least two orders of magnitude above the
background.

Minor Footwall and Basement mineralizations are present at several localities
along the alignment.

To the northeast of the Kafue Anticline, from Luansobe to Bwana Mkubwa, lies
a belt of orebodies in arenites and wackes (e.g. Mufulira) that are here correlated
with the Ore Shale. The Lower Roan succession is continuous along the belt, but
gaps between known orebodies are wider than on the Ore Shale Alignment.

3. Orebodies are controlled by paleotopography. A characteristic of the Copper-
belt orebodies is their localization adjacent to paleohills of the early-Katanga
topography; this criterion has become a most useful guide to exploration. The
copper-bearing horizons are generally lean above paleohills, attain maximum values
on the slopes, and become lean again above paleovalleys. This paleotopographic
control is more noticeable in the arenaceous orebodies (Garlick, 1967; Whyte and
Green, 1971) than in the argillite orebodies, although certainly effective in the latter
also (Mendelsohn, in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 124).

At places, during deposition of the RL 6 and its equivalents, Basement paleo-
hills were the depositional sites of stromatolitic carbonates. These algal mounds,
although not totally depleted in copper, are not generally of ore grade. Arenites and
argillites adjacent to the mounds are the sites of rich ore (Garlick, 1964).

4. Major and minor copper occurrences are stratiform and correlate throughout
the Copperbelt. In figure 4 are shown copper graphs of seven drillholes from
mining and exploration areas in the Copperbelt. Stratigraphic columns and graphs
have been drawn on drilled thickness—not true thickness.

Copper values have been truncated at the 500 ppm mark, but orebodies are
indicated to distinguish them from lesser geochemical anomalies. The seven drill-
cores in figure 4 may not be entirely representative of the respective areas: they
represent some of the preliminary results of a larger geochemical investigation.

The anomalous copper values can be subdivided stratigraphically in four
horizons.

Peak (1): Footwall anomalies occurring in arenites and conglomerates, and not
related to Ore Shale mineralization. The two small anomalies at Chambishi and
Mwambashi (fig. 4) may correlate with the Chibuluma, Mimbula, Fitula orebodies,
the Nkana Footwall orebody, and the deposits south of Kalulushi. However,
owing to the somewhat erratic nature of Footwall orebodies, closely-spaced strati-
graphic and geochemical work is needed to assess the continuity of these anomalous
copper values.

Peak (2): This peak occurs in the Ore Shale, and in the ore wackes and arenites
northeast of the Kafue Anticline, and may transgress into the immediately under-
lying Footwall rocks.

The peak is still noticeable even where the copper concentration is not of ore
grade or thickness, e.g. Luansobe. Peak (2 A), the “A” Orebody of Mufulira, is
here correlated with the lower part of the RL 5, and thus possibly with the Inter-
mediate Orebody at Nchanga.

Peak (3): The peak at, or above, the Glassy Quartzite (Upper Q., Marker Q.,
T.F.Q.), although never emphasized in previous literature, is probably the best
evidence of stratigraphic control of copper distribution. This mineralization attains

===== page 11
225

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA

“yaquaddog uviquvz ay} woaf sajoylfiap uadas ul Saquadingz0 waddoo Aounu pun solput fo uoynqgiasip a1ydvs8yoUg — ‘y ‘O1T

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ey

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|

so

Minos insvrinw

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aunoginawy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 12
 

226 P.L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

ore grade in the Nchanga-Chingola region where it constitutes the Nchanga Upper
Orebody. Elsewhere the mineralization consists of a few visible grains of chalco-
pyrite and has values between a few hundred and a few thousand ppm copper.
At Chambishi and Chililabombwe the mineralization is often found in the Cherty
Dolomite (fig. 4). In a few exploratory drillholes east of Chililabombwe, where the
Ore Shale is not of ore grade, the only distinct mineralization (up to 1% total
copper) is also in the dolomite. Along the whole of the Luansobe-Ndola alignment,
the anomaly is confined to the top of the Glassy Quartzite and overlying argillite,
and it is so persistent that it is used by the Mufulira geologists as a stratigraphic
criterion for the identification of the Glassy Quartzite and Lower Intermediate
Dolomite.

Peak (4): At places, anomalous copper values have been detected in the upper-
most subdivision of the Lower Roan, the RL 3 and its equivalents. Unfortunately
not enough information is available on these anomalies and on their exact strati-
graphic position.

At Mutulira and in the Ndola area, anomalously high copper values are known
to occur in the Blue Shale and in the argillaceous and dolomitic quartzites associ-
ated with it. In a small area at Mwambashi, copper mineralization has been
encountered in a carbonaceous argillite which could be the equivalent of the Blue
Shale. At Lufubu North, northwest of Luanshya, there is a small pocket of
mineralization with values up to 1.5 percent total copper in interbedded arkose and
argillite a few metres above the RL 3/RL 4 contact.

MESOSCALE

Local factors, not all of which are necessarily stratigraphically significant, are
also responsible for finer variations in the distribution of copper at individual mines.

The Ore Shale Orebodies

Chililabombwe (Bancroft) and Musoshi. — At the northern tip of the Zambian
Copperbelt only the Ore Shale mineralization is economic and has been exploited
at three shafts: Kirila Bombwe North and South orebodies, and Konkola. At
Musoshi Mine in Zaire, 3 km along strike from the Konkola Orebody, the Ore
Shale is broadly similar to that of the Chililabombwe region but individual in detail.

At all four localities the Ore Shale is dominantly a silty argillite around 10 m
thick but there are fine differences between each property in lithology and mineral-
ization. Lithological subdivision into units of a metre or so has been extended
over the North and South orebodies which are separated by a barren gap, probably
a bioherm, but at Konkola Orebody only the basal unit (unit A) is recognizable.

This unit is the basal carbonate schist which is usually recognizable throughout
the Ore Shale Alignment. At Musoshi, the carbonate schist is missing and the
Footwall Conglomerate is overlain by a massive siltstone (orebody unit B of
Chililabombwe). This massive siltstone is unmineralized at Musoshi and well
mineralized at South Orebody. At North Orebody, there is a gradual transgression
of mineralization from near the top of unit B into the underlying unit A, and even
into the Footwall, with increasing depth. At North Orebody, changes in mineral-

===== page 13
 

 

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 227

ization at the top of the Ore Shale are gradual, whereas at the bottom they are
erratic and significant over short distances; east of the mine, the mineralization
becomes gradually subeconomic as a result of the downward transgression of
economic values relative to a stratigraphic marker (Anderson, 1968). Thus while
the Ore Shale thickness remains unchanged, the orebody thins by 3 m over a
horizontal distance of 650 m.

Nchanga. — The Lower Banded Shale (Ore Shale) constitutes an important
orebody about 20 m thick. In the Nchanga-Chingola area, the Lower Banded Shale
(L.B.S.) is dominantly a black, carbonaceous laminated argillite similar to the South
Orebody facies at Nkana. Details of stratigraphic variations in mineralization are
largely obscured by supergene effects, but some general observations can be made.
South of the Nchanga-Chingola region in the area of the Chingola open pit,
gradual impoverishment in copper is accompanied by thinning of the L.B.S. North
of the Nchanga Syncline, the L.B.S. is grey and silty rather than black and carbon-
aceous and it is generally sub-economic. An important exception in this area is at
River Lode open pit where a cupriferous lamprophyre dyke intrudes the Ore
Shale. The coincidence of the intrusion with the local mineralization of the L.BS.
may be fortuitous, but the ore is apparently not stratigraphically controlled, and
the relationship merits further investigation.

Chambishi. — At Chambishi, the Ore Shale is a silty argillite, rich in carbonate
towards the base, sandy at the top. To the west and to the south it passes laterally
to a pyritic-carbonaceous argillite. Garlick (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 281) described
sedimentary thinning and changes to sandy facies against two Basement paleohills.
A 500 m wide barren gap atop a Basement paleohill separates Chambishi Main
Orebody from Chambishi West.

Mineralization in the Chambishi Ore Shale is stratiform and analogous to other
deposits along the same belt, but peculiar to Chambishi are barren breccia zones,
approximately 10 m wide, that cut across both stratification and folds. The argillite
within these zones is intensely albitised and veined. Jolly (1971) concluded that

copper, sulphur, and iron minerals in the breccia were replaced by soda and
carbonate minerals.

Nkana (Kitwe). — The regional Ore Shale facies change, from silty argillite
in the north to black argillite in the south (Annels, 1972), cuts obliquely through
the northeastern limb of the Nkana syncline. In the north, at Mindola, the Ore
Shale is subdivided in several lithotypes, but copper concentrations do not appear
to favour any particular subunit (Jordaan, in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 297). It is note-
worthy that higher-grade mineralization occurs near the top of the Ore Shale at
Mindola, and near its base at South Orebody. A biohermal barren gap interrupts
the continuity of the orebody in silty argillite, with rich ore occurring in the
argillite adjacent to the bioherm.

Luanshya. — The vertical and lateral distribution of copper minerals has been
described in detail by Mendelsohn (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 351), and by Lee-
Potter (ibid., p. 343) and Vink (1972) for the Baluba area. In summary, two ore-
bodies, both in Ore Shale (RL 6) are mined at Luanshya: an upper orebody in
silty argillite in the eastern part and a lower orebody in tremolite-biotite-carbonate
schist in the west (Muliashi South). In the tightly folded central part of the mine
workings, where the two orebodies overlap, they are separated by a pyrite-rich
zone. A barren gap has been described by Mendelsohn (op. cit.) in the same general

===== page 14
228 P.L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

area: the Ore Shale passes laterally to a talcose dolomite that has tentatively been
interpreted as a bioherm, although no algal structures have been identified within
it (Garlick, 1964). Towards the west, at the fringe of the lower orebody, the upper
boundary of economic mineralization transgresses downwards until only the basal
part of RL 6 is of ore grade and is overlain by pyritic argillite.

Possibly the step-down of mineralization towards the west should be considered
within the context of the regional transition towards the Footwall Orebodies belt.
However, Footwall mineralization at Muliashi South and in the adjacent Roan
Extension occurs only where the basal RL 6 attains ore grade, and may be the
result of later redistribution from the overlying carbonate schist (Binda, 19695).

Wacke and Arenite Deposits East of the Kafue Anticline

The wackes and arenites which are here correlated with the RL 6 and basal
RLS are the host rocks of several orebodies along the Luansobe-Ndola strike. Of
these only Mufulira is discussed briefly.

The stratiform nature of the Mufulira copper deposit, with three superimposed
and discrete orebodies in metasandstones, has been emphasized in several published
accounts. Each of the three ore horizons represents the beginning of a transgressive
cycle (Maree, 1962). The lowermost of these orebodies (“C”) extends for a strike
length of approximately 5 km, with a 400 m wide barren (pyritic) gap over a
Basement paleohill. The hangingwall of this orebody shows remarkable strati-
graphic control: with the exception of a small area in which “C’” and overlying
“B” orebodies coalesce, the upper boundary of the “C” orebody is marked by a
30 cm thick dolomitic siltstone (Mudseam). The lower boundary and the lateral
extent of the ore do not appear to be controlled either by stratigraphy or by
lithology. The economic mineralization transgresses lateral facies changes from
carbonaceous wackes to well sorted arenites and extends, locally, into the under-
lying Footwall arenites and conglomerate. At places, the whole of the section from
the Footwall arenites to the top of the “A” horizon (see fig. 3) is of ore grade,
perhaps the result of diagenetic redistribution of copper minerals (van Eden, 1972).

At the orebody fringes, copper minerals give way abruptly to pyrite to the west
and to barren arenites to the east without apparent change in lithology. However,
copper concentrations of ore grade are known to occur in metasandstones of the
“C” horizon a few kilometres to the northwest of Mufulira. The same general
characteristics are to be found in the “B” and “A” orebodies: excellent stratigraphic
control on the economic hangingwall, erratic positioning of the footwall, apparent
lack of lithologic control over the lateral extent of the ore.

Footwall Orebodies

At all of the mines where the Ore Shale or the correlative ore wackes and
arenites are exploited, there are erratic patches of copper ore in the clastic meta-
sediments of the Footwall. Occurrences immediately below the Ore Shale are
generally attributable to later remobilization of copper minerals. A zone of oxida-
tion at the base of the Ore Shale occurring locally at most deposits even at great
depths, is evidence of late remobilization. However, especially in the Footwall Ore-
bodies belt (fig. 1) there are orebodies that are sufficiently separate from the Ore

===== page 15
 

STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 229

Shale, or its assumed position, to be considered unrelated to overlying copper
concentrations and possibly deposited during an earlier marine transgression. The
stratigraphic distribution of these “separate” Footwall ore occurrences requires
more regional study, but the following common characteristics can be mentioned.

(a) They show stronger paleotopographic control than Ore Shale deposits, being
invariably located near Basement highs.

(b) They occur in virtually all lithotypes, from the Basal Conglomerate to the
sandstones of the upper Footwall, but not in the large-scale cross-bedded quartzite
that Garlick (1967) considers as eolian in origin. At Mimbula, six zones of copper
mineralization are recognized by Smit (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 280) between the
base of the Katanga Sequence and the base of the Ore Shale; of these zones, only
one, 2 to 10 m thick, has any lateral persistence.

(c) They are stratiform but lenticular in shape and relatively small by Copper-
belt standards.

(d) They are often higher grade than the Ore Shale deposits, e.g. Chibuluma
West (Whyte and Green, 1971), and Fitula.

Hangingwall Orebodies

The occurrence of high copper values at correlatable stratigraphic horizons
above the Ore Shale and its equivalents has already been noted and illustrated in
figure 4.

The Felspathic Quartzite and a few metres of the overlying dolomitic argillite
constitute Nchanga’s Upper Orebody. It is remarkable that such a continuous
arenaceous unit attains ore grade in only two relatively small areas, one on the
southern limb of the Nchanga Syncline, the other to the south in the Chingola
Syncline.

The Nchanga Intermediate Orebody is a smaller lenticular occurrence, mainly
in the Pink Quartzite (fig. 2) and may be correlative with the Mufulira “A”
Orebody.

While some of the Hangingwall ore in the Nchanga-Chingola region is regarded
as redeposited from supergene solutions, the Upper Orebody shows sulphide
mineral zoning at depth which is thought to be primary, and the main copper
mineral is chalcopyrite.

MICROSCALE

The accumulation of copper minerals on bedding planes and their even dis-
semination in the more massive lithotypes have had such large coverage in previous
literature as to require only brief mention in this paper.

In the Ore Shale, a distinction must be made between lower carbonate schist and
upper argillite. In the carbonate schist it is often difficult to distinguish the original
bedding, and the copper minerals usually occur as augen-like blebs, veinlets, and
concentrations that rather reflect the metamorphic than the sedimentary history of
the rock. In the bedded argillite there are some remarkable concentrations of
sulphide grains along bedding planes, whereas in the more massive argillite the ore

===== page 16
230 P.L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

is evenly disseminated, and the grain size is directly related to that of the rock.
Clearly diagenetic in origin are the concretionary spherical bodies a few centimetres
in diameter occurring at several localities towards the top of the Ore Shale. Calcium
sulphate occupies the centre of the spherules and a thin lining of chalcopyrite or
pyrite surrounds it, in contact with the host rock.

The ore-bearing arenaceous rocks display some spectacular concentrations of
copper sulphides on bedding surfaces. At Mufulira and Chibuluma, Garlick (1967)
described accumulations of copper sulphides along bottomset and foresets of cross-
bedding, in hollows of ripple-marks, in erosional potholes, and in a variety of other
sedimentary structures. The concentration of sulphide grains along the dark laminae
of foresets, which are also richer in detrital heavy minerals, in preference to the
light laminae, in cross-bedded arenites of the “C” horizon at Mufulira, is suggestive
of detrital deposition of the ore minerals (Garlick and Fleischer, 1972). As an
alternative explanation van Eden (1972) suggested that the constituents of the
dark laminae had a greater chemical affinity for copper circulating in intrastratal
solutions during diagenesis.

Attempts to identify the mechanisms of deposition of the ore grains through
microscopic examination have so far proved unsuccessful. Original sedimentary
textures are obscured by diagenetic and metamorphic reorganization, and the
sulphides normally occupy interstitial positions among detrital and metamorphic
grains.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Work which is still in progress has resulted in a revised stratigraphic correlation
of the Lower Roan. The RL 3 of Luanshya is correlated with the beds overlying the
Cherty Dolomite in the Chambishi-Nkana basin and with the Shale with Grit of
Chililabombwe, and not with the Felspathic Quartzite as formerly (fig. 2). The
position of the Lower Roan/Upper Roan boundary has been redefined at several
localities on lithologic criteria, regardless to the fact that it can be diachronous
away from a type section. At Mufulira, for example, the contact steps down
stratigraphically towards the southeast owing to the disappearance of the clastic
units overlying the Lower Intermediate Dolomite.

Stratigraphic work on the beds underlying the Ore Shale is still in its early
stages, and correlation of these clastic lenses may prove difficult owing to their
impersistence and local provenance of the materials. The units between the top of
the Footwall and the Upper Roan dolomites can be satisfactorily correlated along
strike on both flanks of the Kafue Anticline. Correlation across the three belts of
figure 1 is possible at a large scale, but uncertain in detail owing to facies changes
and to the presence of thick bodies of amphibolite in the southwestern part of the
Copperbelt. Correlation of these Late Precambrian metasediments is necessarily
lithostratigraphic since time indicators are lacking. Stromatolites and microfossils
which have been recorded in Katanga rocks (Malan, 1964; Paltridge, 1968; Binda,
19725, 1973) are still inadequate for detailed biostratigraphy.

Garlick (in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 89; 1969) suggested that the marine trans-
gression during which the Ore Shale was deposited, was checked at the site of the
Kafue Anticline before crossing it, and that the Mufulira ore horizons are therefore
younger than the Ore Shale. It is, however, more likely that the post-RL 6 uplift

===== page 17
STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 231

correlates and is synchronous with that at the end of the Massive Shale deposition
at Mufulira. In this case the Mufulira “C” and “B” arenaceous horizons must be
considered as the near-shore facies of the Ore Shale. Thus an important corollary
of this correlation is that the stratigraphically more persistent copper occurrences
may be time-dependent.

The association of orebodies with transgressions of the Katanga sea has been
stressed by several authors (Mendelsohn, in Mendelsohn, 1961, p. 125; Maree,
1962; Garlick, 1969). It has been shown in this paper that, not only the orebodies,
but also some minor copper occurrences are strongly controlled by stratigraphy
(fig. 4). If all copper occurrences, major and minor, are considered within the strati-
graphic and sedimentologic framework of the Lower Roan, the following succession
of events can be envisaged:

(1) Transgression covering at least the southwesternmost part of the Copper-
belt. Copper occurrences associated with this transgression are those of the Foot-
wall, e.g. Chibuluma. The northern extent of this transgression has not yet been
investigated: the predominance of continental sediments at Mufulira suggests a
limit may have existed to the southwest of this area. The regression closing this
cycle may extend to the Footwall Conglomerate.

(2) A transgression which advanced swiftly towards the northeast over the
whole of the Copperbelt, depositing the Ore Shale as well as “C” and “B” wackes
and arenites of Mufulira. Minor oscillations of the shore line in the paralic zone
produced two cycles in the Mufulira area, while in the centre of the basin the Ore
Shale sedimentation was continuous. Uplift and regression, with deposition of the
Hangingwall Quartzites and Inter-“AB” grits and quartzite closed this cycle.

(3) Transgression and minor oscillations of the shore lines expressed by the
alternations of arkose and argillite in the lower half of the RL 5 formation. Ore
occurrences associated with these episodes are the “A” Orebody at Mufulira and
the Intermediate Orebody at Nchanga. Minor copper peaks in the Hangingwall
beds at Chililabombwe (fig. 4) may be related to these cycles.

(4) Transgression beginning with the Glassy Quartzite (T.F.Q., Upper
Quartzite), with marine conditions continuing until the top of the Chingola
Dolomite (Cherty Dolomite). To this cycle can be attributed the minor but wide-
spread ore occurrences (3) of figure 4, and the Nchanga Upper Orebody.

(5) Local but violent uplift expressed by the coarse clastics of the RL3 at
Luanshya and Konkola, while marine conditions probably prevailed throughout
most of the Copperbelt. Local copper occurrences in the Blue Shale, and in the
RL 3 at Lufubu North (Luanshya) may be attributed to cycles towards the close
of Lower Roan deposition.

Although the primary source of the metal and the mode of its emplacement
remain a matter of speculation, the sedimentary model proposed above is an
attempt at a regional interpretation of stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and geo-
chemical information up to date. It takes account of the stratiform nature of the
ore occurrences, their regional-stratigraphic continuity, and their cyclical recurrence
in the Lower Roan.

===== page 18
232 P. L. BINDA AND J. R. MULGREW

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Managements of Roan Consolidated Mines Limited and Nchanga Con-
solidated Copper Mines Limited are thanked for permission to publish data
contained in this paper.

The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the geologists of the
Stratigraphic Correlation Study Group and to many other geologists at the various
Copperbelt mines.

Critical reading and helpful comments by M. W. Ellis, P. V. Freeman, and
R. J. Wright are gratefully acknowledged.

References

ANDERSON, R. J. (1968). — Stratigraphic control of variation in orebody width, Kirila Bombwe
North Orebody. Unpublished company report, N.C.C.M., Konkola Division.

ANNELS, A. E, (1972). — Palaeogeography and sedimentology of the Ore Shale formation.
Unpublished company report R.C.M., Prospecting Dept.

BARTHOLOME, P., EvRARD, P., KATEKESHA, F., LoPEz-Ruiz, J. and Nconco, M. (1973). —
Diagenetic ore-forming processes at Kamoto, Katanga, Republic of Zaire. In:
Amstutz, G. C. and BERNARD, A. J. (editors), Ores in Sediments. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
p. 21-41.

Bunpa, P. L. (1969a). — The top of RL7 at Muliashi South. Part I: Lithology and depositional
environment. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 16.

Binpa, P. L. (19695). — The top of RL7 at Muliashi South. Part II: Mineralization and
sedimentary geology. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 23.

Binpa, P. L. (1972a). — Zircons of the Nchanga Granite and overlying metasediments,
Zambia. 24th Int. Geol. Congress, section 1, p. 179-186.
Binpa, P. L. (19726). — Preliminary observations on the palynology of the Precambrian

Katanga Sequence, Zambia. Geologie en Mijnbouw, Vol. 51, p. 315-319.

Binpa, P. L. (1973). — Microfossils from the Lower Kundelungu (Late Precambrian) of
Zambia. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 51.

Binpa, P. L. and Van Even, J. G. (1972). — Sedimentological evidence on the origin of the
Precambrian Great Conglomerate (Kundelungu Tillite), Zambia. Palaeogeogr., Palaco-
climatol., Palaeoecol., Vol. 12, p. 151-168.

Canen, L. (1970). — Etat actuel de la géochronologie du Katangien. In: L. CaHen, J. DELHAL,
S. Deutscu, N. Grocer, D. Lepenr and P. PASTEELS, Three contributions to the
geochronology and petrogenesis of granite rocks in the copperbelt of Zambia and South-
east Katanga Province (Republic of Zaire). Ann. Mus. r. Afr. centr., Vol. 65, p. 7-14.

Canen, L. and LEPERSONNE, J. (1967). — The Precambrian of the Congo, Rwanda, and
Burundi. In: K. RaNkama (editor), The Precambrian. Interscience, New York, N.Y.,
Vol. 3, p. 143-290.

CutrForD, T. N. (1962). — The stratigraphy and structure of the Upper Proterozoic rocks of
northern South-West Africa and their correlation with the “Groupe du Katanga” of
Central Africa. Sixth Ann. Report (1960-1961), Res. Inst. African Geol. Univ. Leeds,
p. 41-43,

Epen, J. G, VAN (1969). — Paleocurrent analysis and remarks on lithostratigraphy of “C”
orebody and footwall formation, Mufulira. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 18.

Eben, J. G. VAN (1970). — Paleocurrent analysis and depositional environment of the “C”
orebody and footwall formation, Mufulira. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 28.
Epen, J. G., Van (1972). — Depositional and diagenetic environment related to sulphide

mineralization, Mufulira, Zambia. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 42. |
Epen, J. G. Van and BINpA, P. L. (1972). — Scope of stratigraphic and sedimentologic analysis
of the Katanga Sequence, Zambia. Geologie en Mijnbouw, Vol. 51, p. 321-328.

===== page 19
STRATIGRAPHY OF COPPER OCCURRENCES IN ZAMBIA 233

Gar ick, W. G. (1964). — Association of mineralization and algal reef structures on Northern
Rhodesian Copperbelt, Katanga, and Australia. Economic Geology, Vol. 59, p. 416-427.

Gartick, W. G. (1967). — Special features and sedimentary facies of stratiform sulphide
deposits in arenites. Proc. 15th Inter-Univ. Geol. Cong., Univ. of Leicester, p. 107-169.

GarLick, W. G. (1969). —- Geology of the Zambian Copperbelt. Horizon, Vol. 11, No. 9,
p. 6-13.

Gartick, W. G. and FLEIscHer, V. D. (1972). — Sedimentary environment of Zambian copper
deposition. Geologie en Mijnbouw, Vol. 51, p. 277-298.

Gray, A. (1930). — The correlation of the ore-bearing sediments of the Katanga and Rhodesian
Copperbelt. Econ. Geol., Vol. 25, p. 783-801.

Hopcson, W. A. (1969). — Stratigraphy and copper distribution in the “C” horizon and
footwall beds at Mufulira West. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., GR 24.

Horrman, U. H. G. (1967). — Correlation of the Lower Roan and Upper Roan strata within
the Copperbelt of Zambia. Unpublished company report, R.C.M., G.R.U. Bull. 7.

Jotty, J. L. W. (1971), — Chambishi breccia zone. Unpublished company report, R.C.M.,
GR 39,

Matan, S. P. (1964). — Stromatolites and other algal structures at Mufulira, Northern
Rhodesia. Economic Geology, Vol. 59, p. 397-415.

Maree, S. C. (1962). — Lithology of the Mufulira copper deposits. In: NIcoLINI, P. (editor),
Stratiform copper deposits in Africa. Part I: Lithology, Sedimentology. Assoc. African
Geol. Surveys, Paris, p. 159-171.

McKenzie, E. (1968). — Roan Basin—geology and structure. Unpublished company report,
R.C.M., Luanshya Division, Geology Dept.

MENDELSonN, F. (editor) (1961). — The Geology of the Northern Rhodesian Copperbelt.
Macdonald, London, 523 pages.

Mutcrew, J. R. (1968). — Recent information on the stratigraphy of the rocks of the Katanga
System derived from drilling in the area between Bancroft and Konkola. Unpublished
company report, N.C.C.M., Konkola Division, Geology Dept.

Mutcrew, J. R. (1972). — Further information on the correlation west of the Kafue Anticline.
Unpublished company report, N.C.C.M., Konkola Division, Geology Dept.

PALTRIDGE, I. M. (1968). — An algal biostrome fringe and associated mineralization at Mufu-
lira, Zambia. Economic Geology, Vol. 63, p. 207-216.

Vink, B. W. (1972). — Sulphide mineral zoning in the Baluba Orebody, Zambia. Geologie en
Mijnbouw, Vol. 51, p. 309-313.

Voet, H. W. and Freeman, P. V. (1972). — Copper orebodies in the basal Lower Roan meta-
sediments of the Chingola Open Pit area, Zambian Copperbelt. Geologie en Mijnbouw,
Vol. 51, p. 299-308.

Wuyte, R. J. and Green, M. E. (1971). — Geology of Chibuluma West. Economic Geology,
Vol. 66, p. 400-424.

