===== page 1 (ocr)
Figure 2

 

 

Sandy clay from Elizabeth Creek thought to be
Tregolana Shale but more likely a much later
deposit. (70742/A9861).

Many rounded quartz grains and few small
ferruginous cherts (speckled black and white)
are probably derived from Whyalla Sandstone.
More angular grains may have derived from
Pandurra Quartzite, Rock matrix is mainly of
clay mineral (grey and white stipple); secondary
chert (dark areas), replacing clay. Scattered,
fine quartz grains (white) are also seen,

Crossed nicols Magnification xX 15

===== page 2 (ocr)
Figure 3

 

CG

Ferruginous deposit from Elizabeth Creek (70743/
A9862).

Large round quartz rock grains (grey and white
mosaic patterns) and quartz mineral grains (flat
white and grey) are seen, Ferruginous cherts
(speckled black, white and grey) are present.
Several rounded cherts are obscured by iron
staining. The groundmass is largely of fine
limonitic quartz (black) and fine clear silt
size quartz grains (white), Whyalla Sandstone.

Crossed nicols Magnification X 15

 

015

?

===== page 3 (ocr)
800158

A_PETROGRAPHIC/MINERAGRAPHIC EXAMINATION

 

 

 

rm OF So

x

— . FROM THE W.

Dated in Sydney
29th December, 1971.

; MT. GUNSON ORE SPECIMENS

 

EST LAGOON AND MAIN OPEN PITS

PACMINEX PTY LTD

Prepared By : P.J. Curtis
PMR. 270/71

===== page 4 (ocr)
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

1.1 Sampling
DISCUSSION
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER WORK

RESULTS

4.1 Petrography

44d West Lagoon
4ot.2 Main Open Pit
41.3 Mill Feed
4.2 Chemistry

4.221 Discussion
4.2.2 Conclusions
REFERENCES

TABLE 1 MI. GUNSON COPPER ORES - CHEMICAL ANALYSES

TABLE 2 MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES - MINERAL COMPOSITIONS

(CALCULATED FROM CHEMICAL ANALYSES)

200159

PAGE NO.

on

20

a1
a1
23

23

===== page 5 (ocr)
. ~ 900160

1. INTRODUCTION

During a visit to Mount Gunson between the 15th and 16th July
of this year a number of specimens were taken of Red Quartzite and
Lithic Sandstone near the top of the Pernatty Grit. Quarries visited
were the West Lagoon which is presently being mined for copper sulphide
ore and the Main Open Cut an abandoned mine in oxide copper ore.
Collection points for the ores were marked on plans. Some specimens
from the Main Open Cut (Nos. 7 and 8) were mislaid and these will have

to be resampled if possible.

1.1 Sampling

Co-ordinates are given indicating sampling points, 2 to 6 from

the West Lagoon pit and 9 and 10 from the Main Open Cut.

Mineralisation at the West Lagoon Pit was in the form of
sulphides - chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite and some bornite
and digenite which form the cement of friable sandstone up to a
thickness of 14 feet and mainly at the junction between the two

formations of Red Quartzite Below and Lithic Sandstone above.

Similarly, mineralisation in the Main Open Cut occurs at the
junction of the Red Quartzite and Lithic Sandstone formations and is

mainly malachite or chrysocolla which are frequently intergrown.

2. DISCUSSION

The work done to date on the Gunson deposits can at best be
regarded as only preliminary and at present consists of petrographic
examination of selected specimen from the Pernatty Grit of the West
Lagoon and Main Open Pit. Some samples from the latter mine were
unfortunately lost and sampling from the former was a little bit hectic

owing to the heavy rain which made the bottom of the pit something of a

[anes

===== page 6 (ocr)
OC0161

quagmire.

However some ideas on the petrogenesis of Gunson ores have
come out of the petrography and are related below, dealing firstly with
the West Lagoon Pit (sulphides)

ae

  

and then the Main Open Pit ('oxides').

e

“
i) Most Lithic Sandstone samples consist of. large very rounded

- quartz grains (av. 1 mm) with tiny silt-size. quartz grains and

. Pyetltored
clay~as a more or less continuous matrix. Red Quartzite consists ”
mainly of poorly sorted quartz grains, subangular. to-rounded

and much lLithified; with clay sporadically in pockets throughout. ~

ii) The sediments are presently mainly lithic arenite while some
specimens approach lithic wacke (as per Williams, Turner and
Gilbert) and have suffered much diagenetic alteration. This
applies particularly to the Red.Quartzite where many of the
pores between primary quartz grains have been filled by \

secondary quartz. This has replaced clay cement but not relict *

limonite trains which outline and. indicate the’ roundness’ of ~ HE

many of the original quartz grains. Diagenetic growth of the
quartz grains now give them an appearance of unusual angularity

but most grains were originally rounded. Addition of secondary

quartz to original grains does not change their optical”

continuity.

iii) Sulphides, silt and clay as seen in the Lithic Sandstone were
dumped into flood channels with coarse sand as described in
Section v). Later diagenesis led to recrystallisation and
nucleation of sulphides into ribbon-like network forms in
the interstices. Some growth of quartz sand grains and limited
replacement of sand grain margins and clay mineral matrix can be

seen.

iv) The presence of framboidal pyrite in the clay matrix of sample
3A and of pyrite atolls around chalcopyrite grains in sample
2A indicate biochemical precipitation of primary sulphides in

a sapropelic environment such as deposition in the bottom muds

[owes

===== page 7 (ocr)
-3- 0001862

in a closeby playa lake or lagoon and is at odds with the
irregular coarse to fine grit and sandstone deposition of the
main rock fabric. Coarse sands, and poorly..sorted..sands.at
that, were either deposited in deep water by turbidity currents
or in a shallow.tectonically unstable shelf environment~in
torrential.channels adjoining the littoral. The presence of
eross-bedding rather than graded-bedding in the sediments would
suggest the latter type of deposit. Calcium sulphate forms in
playa. lakes. behind sea shore lines and normally under-stagnant
conditions. Metals in solution from eroding rocks in the
catchment area would accumulate in such a stagnant environment
and with the aid of sulphate reducing bacteria hydrogen sulphide
was..produced utilising the calcium sulphate and precipitating
metal sulphides which quite rapidly accumulated on the bottom

of the 'lake'. Since the bacteria required some organic matter
for their metabolism this could well have, been supplied by debris
from marginal algal reefs which are known to have occurred in_

Lt
» oe am! f
adjoining Woocalla Dolomite of similar age. Seasonal-.floods heeesSerttey

 

occur from*time to time in desert environments such as this,
partly washed.out the playa.lakes and carried. clay/silts=and
sulphides..mixed-up with coarse sands caught-up by the flood
waters into the flood channels the sand mixing with the kaolin
matrix of the Red Quartzite and the kaolin and silt matrix of

the Lithic Sandstone. The generally rounded shape of the

primary grains, lack of heavy minerals other than zircon and
tourmaline and lack of feldspar indicate an already formed
sandstone as the source of sand grains in the channel deposits, *
not a primary igneous source. Subsequent burial of the deposits
through subsidence encouraged mobility-under supergene conditions
of sulphides and deposition of the ‘cement! sulphidesjust~below
the. water table. Movement of sulphides and some silica appears
to have taken place about the same time, since in at least one
specimen supergene chalcocite is seen to be associated with *
secondary quartz in a 'vein'. Primary copper iron sulphides
appear to have broken down under supergene conditions to give
complex covellite/bornite/digenite intergrowths. The final

sulphide supergene product is chalcocite which frequently

[aene

===== page 8 (ocr)
 

 

 

© ) oo horizon may exist below the oxidised levels, but with the A

-4- 000163

occurs in coarse veins and fissures particularly seen in the

Red Quartzite. Covellite occurs disseminated in Lithic

Sandstone and possibly pseudomorphs original chalcopyrite in

an environment where there is restricted movement of solutions.
Alternatively where chalcocite and covellite occur as disseminated
grains these may have been primary precipitates in the playa

lake environment, particularly where the sulphide is seen to be finel
intergrown with clay mineral, the clay particles acted as a nucleus

for precipitation of sulphides.

v) In view of the proximity of sulphide deposits in rocks of
equivalent age it is considered unlikely that oxide copper
minerals would have been deposited concurrently with sulphides
particularly since original environmental conditions in host
rocks do not appear to have been noticeably different. Also
the inhomogeneous nature of crystallisation and mineral
replacement suggest supergene rather than primary precipitation

of basic copper carbonate and silicate as considered possible

by King (Réf. 6). No relict sulphides or sulphide textures were

 

imens of relict sulphide >

 

seen in specimens selected but_sp
have been found in the Main Open Pit: Deposition of primary
sulphides in gel form along fractures and joint planes in
formed Lithic Sandstone and Red Quartzite just above a rapidly
receding water table would lead to rapid oxidation of the ouiphiaes
by oxygenated CO> charged water. JAn enriched supergene sulphide >

oes cre)

absence of leached zones in the oxide ores it seems unlikely. » “/@¢
7.

 

vi) The basic copper chlorides, atacamite and paratacamite were
not strictly identified in thin section since the mineral,
thought to be atacamite showed unusual optical properties.
However X-ray diffraction examination by Dr. Deleon of the
C.S.R. Research Laboratories confirmed the presence of

_ aLatacamite generall replacing malachite~in specimen 9 and
from specimens taken in the metallurgical ‘test area' of
the Main Open Pit.
ee

 

 

Jaovee

===== page 9 (ocr)
vii)

viii)

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

v)

vi)

5 ~ 000164

The clay.matrix.of unmineralised Lithic Sandstone-.and. Red «
Quartzite was examined by X-ray diffraction by C.S.R. Research

Laboratories and was confirmed as kaolinite.

Total copper, acid soluble copper (chalcocite test), total

iron and some aluminium determinations have been done on

samples 1, 2A, 4, °5, 5A, 6A, 6B and 6C all from the West

Lagoon Open Pit. Total copper, acid soluble copper (chrysocolla)
acid soluble copper (malachite), chloride, carbonate and
phosphate have been determined on samples 9B and 10 from the
Main Open Pit.

The calculated mineral composition from assay frequently conflicts

with the approximate modal composition as observed in section.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER WORK

To collect bornite from the West Lagoon Pit to study its
paragenetic relationships with other sulphides and the gangue

present.

To collect more chalcopyrite from the West Lagoon Pit to
study further its relationships with the framboidal pyrite
present.

To collect specimens of known atacamite and paratacamite from

the Gunson area.

To see maps showing sedimentary features such as load casts,

ripple marks, washouts and direction of false bedding, etc.

To do some limited sulphur isotope work on selected sulphides

if this has not already been done.

To see tailing sample from the Mill after flotation to study

sulphide losses.

[ave

===== page 10 (ocr)
 

~6- 000185

RESULTS

4.1 Petrography

4.161 West Lagoon
Samples 2A Lithic Sandstone and 2B Red Quartzite taken

from adjoining positions NW of the Open Pit.

Specimen 2A (20867mN 6766mE) - In view of clay matrix,
most likely a Protoquartzite (as per Pettijohn). wiyseeq sarvostevs

The section consists of rounded to subangular quartz
grains which are almost equigranular (av. size 20042) . Diagenesis
of the quartz component has added quartz (which is optically
continuous with primary quartz) to grains, excluding the original
clay mineral cement and producing a silica cemented patchy quartzite.
However the excluded clay has been squeezed into pockets as large
as some of the smaller quartz grains. After very careful checking of the
section no identifiable feldspar was seen. “Occasional large purple
detrital zircon grains and greenish tourmaline prisms were seen in
the matrix. Trains of fine limonite particles just inside quartz
grains forming the fused mosaics indicate original position of quartz
grain boundaries. With the quartz grains are seen occasional

‘quartz gneiss' grains of tiny mosaics of sheared quartz grafins.

Sulphides present are bands of chalcopyrite > chalcocite.
The chalcopyrite forts segregations between quartz grains where
crystal growth has not sealed off the quartz mosaics, i.e. where
a clay matrix remained between the quartz grains. The chalcopyrite,
generally 10 to 20 frav., maximum 100 4, fills completely spaces
between the primary quartz grains and contains marginal discontinuous
pyrite relicts (atoll textures indicating syngenetic, simultaneous
crystallisation of the sulphides) with occasional tiny quartz
inclusions giving the appearance of having replaced part of the
clay matrix. The rounded appearance of the pyrite is reminiscent

of framboidal pyrite seen in specimen number 3A.

[eves

===== page 11 (ocr)
fo -7- — OO0186

Fe Sphalerite to 0.3 mm is seen with continuous margins (15p)
of chalcopyrite boundaries suggest simultaneous crystallisation

and rejection of chalcopyrite by sphalerite to grain boundaries =

 

atoll texture. The sulphides have replaced the 'clay' from between
quartz grains. The replacement of clay by chalcopyrite is diagenetic

and post depositional.

Flecks of chalcocite (av. 2044, maximum 1,00044) occur

 

sporadically in one corner of the section. These are not seen
_ associated with other sulphides but as material which has replaced

interstitial clay.

=
A rough modal analysis gave the following v/v percent
oo results. Quartz 95; clay mineral 3, zircon + tourmaline + sphene 1
sulphide <1.
- PAXDURRA EH.

Specimen 2B (20867mN 6766mE) - Red Quartzite. Similar to

Lithic Sandstone, stratigraphically just above, but coarser grained,

the grains being more irregular and poorly sorted. Large pockets

of clay occur, the clay flakes showing alteration to sericite in a

narrow zone adjoining the quartz, is mainly clear of fine inclusions
! except for fine trains of limonite particles which occur just inside
ae the margins of the quartz grains which formed part of the orjginal
cement before diagenesis and growth of the quartz grains fused them
together. However, in places clay still forms the main cement.
Quartz gneiss grains occur of similar size range to the quartz
mineral grains. To illustrate different provenance of the various
quartz mineral grains, some grains are completely clear of strain
whereas others. show extreme strain. This property is quite independent

of grain size. Occasional worn zircon grains.are seen in the matrix.

Very little sulphide mineralisation is seen. Occasional
complex grains showing irregular bornite and covellite exsolution
— (?) in chalcopyrite (av. 120 mm) - evidence for syngenetic gel
precipitation of sulphides in situ or transported with clay in a
slurry. Mostly scattered chalcopyrite (av. 10 to 20«or less) is

present. The sulphides occupy. the interstices of the quartz grains

[anes

===== page 12 (ocr)
-8- OCO16?

and have apparently replaced part of the clay matrix.

A rough modal analysis (v/v percent) is given. Quartz 96,

clay mineral 3, zircon <1, sulphide <1.

A comparison of the Lithic Sandstone (2A) with the Red
Quartzite (2B) shows :-

i) sulphide in both specimens shows syngenetic precipitation
textures followed by some diagenetic replacement of gangue
minerals, mainly interstitial clay; but limited replacement

of quartz grain margins only;

ii) specimen 2B shows a much greater variation in original quartz
grain size, the grains in both 2A and 2B tending to be angular

to subangular in shape;

iii) clay mineral content: somewhat less for sample 2B; and
: \

iv) both samplés have been subjected to diagenesis about equally.

Specimens 3A, 3B and 4 - taken from the NW corner of the
open pit, 50 feet from samples 2A and 2B and at approximately
similar stratigraphic horizons in the Red Quartzite and Lithic

Sandstone units.

Specimen 3A. (20890mN 6774mE) Lithic Sandstone - wuavyacnh SS
The quartz grains have a greater maximum size (av. 1.5 mm)
with a broad size range (down to 2044). The larger grains are well
rounded and the fine material angular to subangular. Clay cement is
more evenly distributed around the quartz grains with fewer fused
mosaic patches. Rock fragments of quartz grains and some chert
(to .3 mm) occur and also a proportion of feldspar (microcline)
grains (to .4 mm) appearing to show some decomposition to sericite.
Fine limonite particle trains traverse some of the larger quartz
grains indicating former grain boundaries. Occasional worn purple

zircons are present in the matrix and traces of rutile.

[owes

===== page 13 (ocr)
 

on

“3 CC0163

This specimen is different from the lithic sandstone 2A
taken from a closeby location in containing more rounded quartz
grains, more chert and rock fragments, some feldspar and in being *

more poorly sorted.

Sulphides present are masses of tiny framboidal pyrite

_grains. showing raspberry aggregates of tiny pyrites (separated by

carbonaceous envelopes ?) and a porous colloform external zone, up
to 604. Sometimes . colloform porous masses occur as external
‘shells! around quartz grains (rolling pebble action in sulphide
mud ?); some pyritohedra forms are seen where framboidal pyrite has
recrystallised - post depositional diagenesis. Traces of covellite
and chalcocite (10 to 20/4) occur as complex intergrowths with clay
particles. Evidence of syngenetic precipitation of colloidal
sulphide with clay or brought in with epigenetic flood material
as previously described.
a

An approximate modal composition (v/v percent) shows
quartz 84, chert and rock fragments 5, clay 5, microcline 2,
sulphidés (mostly pyrite) 4.

wrtiryace SS.

Specimen 3B (30890mN 6774mE) - Lithic Sandstone at junction
of red-brown and pale areas. This sandstone is very similarto the
previous sandstone examined (specimen 3A) except for a higher

proportion of chert and quartz rock fragments (mainly gneiss).

The darker zone is different from the lighter zone only
in containing more fine limonite particles in clay matrix adjoining
the quartz grains or as a narrow perimeter just inside the quartz
grains indicating some diagenetic growth of the quartz; and also by
the presence of limonite stained cherts in the dark zone. Large

zircon grains (to .2 mm) occur embedded in cherts or in the matrix).

No sulphides are seen in either light or dark zones. The
lighter zone may indicate ground water leaching (high limonite in
dark zone). This would be borne out by the presence of supergene

sulphides at a lower level in the series.

[oases

===== page 14 (ocr)
 

“ ~ 0 C00169

An approximate modal analysis is given here:-
Quartz mineral grains 70, quartz rock fragments 10, chert 15, clay

matrix 5, zircon and tourmaline <1.

Specimen 4 (20886mN 6776mE) Red Quartzite ore - Parrnagen,

Similar to specimen 2B but quartz grains are rather less
angular and fairly equigranular with an average size of 0.3 mm, and
there is less interstitial clay. Quartz grains are largely fused
into mosaics leaving the usual trails of limonite particle trains
inside enlarged quartz grains. The limonite trails indicate that
before diagenesis, grains were more rounded than at present. Clay
occurs as fine flakes relegated to pockets, altering.to. sericite. ¥
A little detrital tourmaline and zircon occur some of which encroach
on and are partially enclosed by growths of diagenetic quartz, the
original..clay matrix having been: expelled by growing quartz: Some

crystals of lepidocrocite (av. 4 mm) occur in the clay matrix.

Massive sulphide as chalcocite occurs as veins, 0.6 mm to
3.0 mm wide or as individual grains (av. 0.10 mm size). Within the
chalcocite are seen residual bornite and digenite as trains lengthwise
along the vein and as complex disordered intergrowths. This would
_ suggest supergene enrichment by chalcocite around original primary
lpornite (and chalcocite ?). The chalcocite appears weakly *

anisotropic where blotchy (twinning ?) occurs.

An approximate modal analysis is as follows:-
Quartz mineral grains 82, quartz rock fragments and chert 5, clay 3,
sulphides 10, zircon and tourmaline <1 (but more plentiful than in

previous sections examined of this series).

Specimens 5 and 5A, adjoining, about 650 feet to the south-
east of specimen 4.

Specimen 5 (20812mN 6816mE) Red Quartzite PAvDyRRa Gam -

Similar to specimen 2B but with rather less clay in the
interstices and then in pockets; the quartz is more equigranular

and therefore there is some greater similarity with specimen 4.

[vee

===== page 15 (ocr)
 

-1- -e00170

Sorting into bands is evident. Intense diagenesis has occurred which

has given quartz grains a jig-saw appearance in mosaics. Trains of
limonite particles within quartz grains indicate primary quartz was

more rounded. There is a general lack of fine interstitial quartz.

Few chert or quartz rock fragments are identifiable. 'Clay' takes on \
a faint greenish appearance with bluish anomalous low order interference \

colours in polarised light with crossed nicols.

Traces of chalcopyrite occur but there is more chalcocite
(.04 to .1 mm) with clay in the interstices. Approximate 1 mm width
veins of chalcocite are seen as cement between some quartz grains.
Other chalcocite grains scattered through the section average 300

approx. in size.
/

Chalcocite in bands is most probably supergene and
replaced original primary bornite, chalcopyrite or other primary
sulphides but this is not evident.

\ :

An approximate modal analysis:-

Quartz mineral grains 92, quartz rock fragments 2, clay 3,

tourmaline £1, zircon (worn detrital) 1, sulphide 2.
waysten SS.
Specimen 5A (20812mN 6816mE). Lithic sandstone immediately

above Red Quartzite. Large rounded quartz grains and some quartz
gneiss rock fragments (av. 1 mm) with a second generation (?) smaller
rounded quartz grains in the interstices (av. 0.1 mm). Large rounded
cherts occur and large pockets of clay mineral; some clay altering to ¥»
sericite somewhat limonite stained is plentiful occupying much of the
interstices between the large quartz grains. Sericite forms a fine
skin around the large quartz grains. .

Scattered worn detrital purple zircon and green tourmaline ‘
grains occur with the clay. Sulphide as chalcocite faintly anisotropic
(maximum 0.8 mm, av. O.5 mm) is plentiful and of irregular shape,
showing some replacement of clay grains between the quartz grains
and margins of some of the grains. Could be the product of diagenesis,

it is difficult to say.

[owes

===== page 16 (ocr)
~ 1 000171

Quite a proportion of chalcocite is between 20 and 4O/*+

approx. and much of this could be lost to slimes in milling.

Modal analysis : quartz mineral grains 72, quartz rock

fragments 12, chert 6, clay 5, sulphides 5, tourmaline + zircon <1.

Specimens 6A, B and C (10716mN 6848mE) at the south end

of the open pit. :
WHY ts” .

Specimen 6A - Lithic Sandstone. Much like specimen 3A
texturally. Like specimen 5A but with fewer silt-size quartz grains
in the matrix. Covellite is the main rock cement here varying
between 20 and 200/¢ thick in the interstices. Some apparent
replacement of clay’ minerals by sulphide is due to post depositional
diagenesis. Remaining clay is yellowish limonitic or green, is
associated with tiny sub-angular to rounded quartz grains and
provides the balance of the rock cement. The larger quartz grains
average 1 mm in size, the residual small quartz grains averaging
0.2 mm. quart 2’ rock fragments and chert are rounded and average
about 0:5 mm in size although there are some large quartz gneiss -
fragments around 1 mm. Some of the chert fragments are quite
limonitic. Heavy minerals (tourmaline and zircon) are sparse.

, #

There is a close association here between covellite and
interstitial clay and silt rock cement. However, primary covellite
is not usual and on the Copperbelt it is most frequently secondary
after chalcopyrite. The evidence points to sulphides and matrix ~
being slumped in together with silt and clay prior to consolidation. ~
Rejection of sulphides as well as gangue minerals is shown by clear
outer zones of secondary quartz around large quartz grains and local
fusing of quartz mosaics. Diagenetic crystallisation tends to obscure

original rock/sulphide relationships.
An approximate modal analysis (v/v percentages) :-

Quartz mineral grains 63, quartz rock fragments 17, chert 5, clay 5,

sulphides 10, tourmaline + zircon <<1.

[oes

===== page 17 (ocr)
~ 13 - Q00172

: Specimen 6B (20716mN 6848mE) - Red Quartzite paw»vera ©™-
Very similar texturally to specimen 2B. Mainly rounded

to subangular quartz grains averaging nearly 1 mm in size. Many
of the grains appear somewhat flattened but with no definite
orientation and are clear except for narrow trains of fine
limonite trains just inside quartz, denoting position of original

limits of grain boundaries. A few large quartz rock fragments

 

also occur, some being crowded with fine limonite particles. Very
few small quartz grains occur in the clay matrix which is clear and
colourless. Occasional olive~green tourmaline grains with colourless
authigenic overgrowths occur mainly in the matrix but some are
included in margins of post depositional quartz diagenetic growths.
Purple rubbly zircons and a little sphene are seen.
-

Grain sizes are similar to 64 - Lithic Sandstone but in

mm 6B there is more clay matrix and the primary quartz grains are not
so rounded. x

Sulphides present are seen to be occasional anhedral
chalcopyrite grains, maximum size 45 approx., having a broad -
perimeter of covellite, probably due to post depositional replacement
of primary chalcopyrite by percolating copper charged solutions
i. sO before diagenesis sealed-off many of the rock pores. *

Approximate modal analysis, v/v percentages:-
Quartz mineral 71, quartz rock 20, chert 3, clay 5, tourmaline +
- zircon<<1, sulphide <1. :

Specimen 6C (20716mN 6848uE) - Red Quartzite PavoveraA O™-

A very poorly sorted rock, somewhat, similar to 6B but
in this section occur areas of finer lenticular quartz (av. 0.3 mm)
which have been assimilated into larger quartz grains (av. 0.8 mm).
Strained and unstrained quartz grains occur ~ some maintain optical
continuity after diagenetic growth. There are also great variations
“in quartz grain size. Occasional large quartz grains contain
mua scattered fine rutile needles, are otherwise clear except for the ™

trains of fine limonite inclusions which indicate former grain

Jewee

===== page 18 (ocr)
 

 

ae | 000173

boundaries of original constituent quartz grains. Large pockets

of clay matrix occur and these are free from quartz inclusions.

Quartz rock fragments (mostly quartz gneiss) are sparse; some chert
aggregates contain many fine limonite particles. Large zircons ~ =
appear euhedral and show growth zones. Possible traces of pleochroic

andalusite are present.

. Sulphide as chalcocite is moderately abundant and occurs
as small grains (av. 0.1 mm) occupying some spaces between quartz.
One vein of supergene chalcocite (width 0.5 mm) has few inclusions
but is intergrown with secondary quartz in veins. Euhedral quartz
forms occur lining the secondary veins ~ grow into chalcocite mass. »

Approximate modal analysis, v/v percentages:-
Quartz mineral 87, quartz rock 5, chert 2, clay 5, heavy mineral <1,
sulphide 1.

. \
4.1.2 Main Open Pit wath atem
» Specimen 9A (8402mN 6740mE) - Lithic Sandstone (Protoquartzite
of Pettijohn).
:

Texturally, intermediate between specimen 2A on the one

hand and specimens 3A and 6A Lithic Sandstone of West Lagoon with

a similar degree of rounding to Specimen 2A.

Comparative petrology possible only where deposition of

‘oxide' copper minerals has not obscured the ‘sandstone! fabric.

Poorly sorted quartz grains are subangular to rounded and
average 0.8 mm in size. Few quartz rock fragments, (quartz gneiss
mostly, or chert) occur. The usual trains of fine limonite particles
traverse across and form a perimeter just inside the quartz grains
demarcating primary quartz grain boundaries. Clay showing some
initial recrystallisation to sericite occurs as narrow interstitial | x
zones around and pockets adjoining the quartz grains, the sericite
usually forming a thin skin around the quartz. Fine platelets of

clay and flakes of sericite occur in channels but these grade into

[eves

===== page 19 (ocr)
- 15 - 000174

coarser platelets of chalcedony in pockets.

Some tourmaline prisms with rounded dark green centres,
and tiny purple detrital zircons are embedded in authigenic quartz,

or in the clay matrix.

The approximate mode of 'non-mineralised' fraction:-
Quartz mineral grains 91, quartz rock fragments 5, chert <1, clay/

sericite 3, tourmaline and zircon <1.

The part of the specimen containing oxide copper mineralisation
shows unoriented stellate acicular groups of prisms showing high
birefringence, faint pleochroism, and oblique extinction which were
identified..as.malachite. The malachite is set in a matrix of chert
debris stained with limonite and in areas of a clear pale green 'clay'
identified by X-ray diffraction as atacamite. There does appear to be
an increase in, the ratio of quartz rock fragments to 10 volume percent

in the oxide copper gone but this may be a local characteristic.

eo

In one fissure in the rock (caused by the growth of high
molecular bulk malachite from low volume sulphides) acicular malachite is
seen to line the fissure, the latter being filled in with atacamite as
clear green platelets showing anomalous interference colourss Ina
polished section under low power magnification a 'vein' of pale
blue-translucent.chrysocolla becomes darker when it envelopes the
clear dark green transparent atacamite. There exists a very pale

green translucent chrysocolla at the junction of the two minerals.

Specimen 9B (8402mN 6740mE) - Red Quartzite  fawsara on
Two zones with a sharp contact parailel to the bedding are
seen here. One zone consists of rounded grains of quartz (av. 0.3 mm).
The other zone, (texturally reminiscent of specimen 2B where not
mineralised) contains the copper oxide mineralisation. The quartz
grains in the second zone are mainly coarse (av. 0.8 mm to maximum
3 mm) and angular with associated chert and amorphous bluish

chrysocolla containing pockets of acicular malachite. The chert,

[uses

===== page 20 (ocr)
 

 

- 16 - Q0O1L75
chrysocolla and malachite generally occupy fissures in the coarse
sandstone, the chrysocolla and chert providing. the main matrix.

Also present in this zone are large zircon grains (av. .1 mm) as
euhedra embedded in the matrix and present in appreciable amounts.
The appearance of the second zone is not unlike that of a mineralised

greywacke or cataclasite.

Some 'geodes' in the mineralised zone are seen to contain

botryoidal masses of chrysocolla.

Amorphous looking malachite appears to coat some of the
quartz grains of the mineralised zone.

Another section of specimen 9B shows coarse subangular to
rounded quartz grains to 2 mm, the spaces between the quartz grains
being filled with mainly malachite of colloform appearance and
containing ‘islands! of chalcedony intergrown with pale blue
‘chrysocolla. In addition both minerals frequently line cavities
containing a transparent green flakey mineral, atacamite. Fractures
traversing the quartz grains are also filled with malachite as
extensions of the main malachite matrix.

Some ‘quartz gneiss fragments occur alternating with the

large quartz mineral grains.

In one area of the section, branching veins (0.3 mm in
thickness) of chrysocolla, pale blue-green and clear, are margined
by in-growing acicular malachite needles. One adjoining cavity is
filled with amorphous chrysocolla surrounded by a narrow zone of

chalcedony embedded in massive malachite.

Locally, in the malachite are seen-pockets of radiate
needles of limonite-stained green atacamite showing straight
extinction and moderate birefringence. Abundance of copper oxide

minerals in Specimen 9B indicate malachite > chrysocolla > atacamite.

[anes

===== page 21 (ocr)
~ 17 ~ N09176
Paragenesis of oxide copper minerals appears to depend
upon local conditions of carbonated water, colloidal silica in the
copper containing waters, or possibly on the presence of dolomite or
calcite on the one hand or of chalcedony in the matrix of the
sandstone which slowly react with the copper solutions percolating

through the mainly clay matrix of the sandstone.

No evidence of the previous presence of sulphides are
seen in these rocks such as relict nuclei of chalcocite or residual
iron pan horizons from decomposed chalcopyrite or bornite. However,
such sulphide relicts have been found and it is assumed that the
bulk of oxide copper minerals are not far removed from the original
sulphide source and that many of them are the result of in situ

replacement due to a radical change in the pH-Eh environment.

Other specimens 10A, B and C were taken from part of the
Main Open Cut already samples for metallurgical test work by
R. Dudgeon at Mount Gunson Mine.
a
Specimen 10A (8329mN 6778mE)

A coarse grained sandstone where the quartz grains
(averaging 0.2 mm) are mostly subangular; or show rounding due to
corrosion or replacement by oxide copper minerals. Cement between
the grains is largely malachite which in patches grades into a
clear green flakey atacamite mainly isotropic but also displaying
anomalous interference colours (amorphous and crystalline material ?)
and having RI's significantly higher or about equal to neighbouring
quartz grains and possibly lower than those of malachite. The
atacamite appears to be replacing the malachite present leaving
irregular shaped relict islands of the malachite. Both the atacamite
and the malachite traverse fractures in the quartz grains; the
atacamite traversing in broad sub-parallel fractures across the
quartz mosaics. Large clusters of malachite as radiating fibres
display high birefringence. Some malachite with limonite staining
which obscures the optical characteristics, occupies fissures in the
rock. The malachite contains blue-green islands of isotropic to

near isotropic chrysocolla.

[aves

===== page 22 (ocr)
- 8 - 900172

Fracture fillings of malachite with associated atacamite
and some chrysocolla would not bear milling with an average width
of approximately 16 microns and would slime. Larger 'patches' of
malachite (av. 2 mm) would not have to be ground excessively to
free them from quartz gangue. The matrix component between quartz
grains is very high due to previous atmospheric leaching of primary
quartz in fractures in an oxidation environment leaving widened
channels and pores where copper carbonates and silicates were
formed by reaction of permeating copper solutions with colloidal
silica and carbonate solutions. These were therefore filled with
oxide copper minerals and debris from adjoining leached rocks which
also supplied the copper from leached sulphides.

Specimen 10B (8329mN 6778mB)

A poorly sorted sandstone of large, rounded to subangular
quartz grains varying between 0.1 and 2.0 mm; some crude banding is
shown where maximum grain size decreases to 0.3 mm; grain size is
too irregular to obtain a satisfactory average size for the grains.

Chert fragment “are ten percent of all of the quartz.

Cement and fracture-fill is mainly chrysocolla (blue-green)
but also patchily malachite in finer fractures and with pale green
atacamite and chalcedony in places. Mineralisation is confined to

horizons where there is greatest variation in grain size.

Rounded grains of zircon associated with brown opaque
detritus, also perfect tetragonal grains (average 0.1 mm) occur

in the interstices.

Milling problems as for Sample 10A but here most malachite
is interstitial to quartz and thickness of the cement is 20Atapprox.
Milling, sufficiently to free from quartz attachments would cause

sliming of the malachite.
Sample 10C (8329mN 6778mB)

Similar to sample 10A, quartz grains average 0.2 mm in

size but malachite is more abundant, filling voids up to 0.25 mm and

[aves

===== page 23 (ocr)
 

-19- 900178

alternating with clear grass-green glassy atacamite displaying anomalous
interference colours and first order reds and yellows. Brownish
translucent glass commonly forms nuclei for radiate masses of

malachite prisms. Alternating with the patches of green atacamite

are colloform masses of chalcedony intergrown with chrysocolla and
faintly brown to pale green in colour. Also cross-fibres of chrysocolla
form a perimeter around green atacamite in voids. Chrysocolla which
lines the vesicles, contains an intergrowth of translucent malachite

and clear green atacamite.

As in the previous specimen 10A a zone of fractured chert
and quartz occurs containing a matrix of clay or green atacamite.
In places atacamite is seen to be intergrown with some malachite.
Malachite ensheaths chrysocolla in patches. Perfect hexagonal basal
sections of quartz (the result of diagenetic growth) are seen in

part of the section containing much limonitic debris.

As in previous sections, quartz grains display cross

EN
fractures in which malachite is precipitated.

Encroachment by chrysocolla along fractures following
original grain boundaries in constituent quartz-gneiss grains of

rock fragments is seen. -

One interesting character of this specimen is a transition
of variable copper composition from colourless chalcedony, through
bluish-white chalcedony to blue-green chrysocolla. This indicates
precipitation of silica gel in cavities left by leached quartz and
differential absorption by the gel of permeating copper solutions
from weathered, oxidised sulphides. The meteoric waters involved
were fairly alkaline. Paragenesis of the oxide copper minerals
appears generally to be chrysocolla, malachite and then atacamite
but continuous variation in the chemical environment will reverse

the chrysocolla-malachite sequence.

[owes

===== page 24 (ocr)
- 20 - 900179

443 Mill Feed
A number of thin and polished sections (grains mounted
in araldite) taken from Gunson mill feed sampled 16th July 1971 at

8.20 am, were examined.

The thin-section shows quartz grains (approximately -5 to
4 mm) and fragments of quartz mosaics having individual composite
grains approximately 1 mm; also quartz gneiss composites (to 1 mm).
Crushing has not freed all composite quartz from mosaics where the

cement is clay and/or sericite.

Polished sections show a number of interesting composite
sulphide grains but it is significant that most sulphides are free
from gangue attachments except for covellite which shows complex
growths with the gangue mineral. Covellite grain size if frequently
<5 pe

\

The greatest order of abundance of sulphide concentrations
are chalcocite/covellite intergrowths, the former mineral -quite
white in reflected light - is pock marked by tiny ribbon-like
inclusions of the latter. There are also numerous mottled grains
of chalcocite and digenite, intergrown.

€

Chalcopyrite is the next most abundant sulphide. It is

largely free from intergrowth by other sulphides and by gangue.

Some grains do show complex intergrowths with pyrite.

The third most abundant sulphide is covellite, complex-
locked to gangue (mostly clay), or replacing pyrite as described
above.

Pyrite as small euhedral forms (cubes) are seen.

Bornite appears to occur infrequently as a secondary

product from the decomposition of chalcopyrite.

There are a number of chalcopyrite or bornite grains

[aves

===== page 25 (ocr)
 

 

 

21 900180

showing attachment to minerals with higher Cu:Fe ratio indicating
either supergene enrichment by percolating copper solutions through
pores and fissures in the sandstone or simultaneous crystallisation
from sulphide gels with subsequent separation of sulphides on
erystallisation in ratios dependant upon Cu:Fe:S availability.

Both types of reaction occur in the ores at Gunson.

. In other polished sections chalcopyrite grains are seen
to outnumber chalcocite grains and shows the inhomogeneous nature *

of ore being mined.

Size of the sulphide copper grains varies 40 to 100 for
chalcocite and chalcopyrite and the various bornite/digenite/
chalcocite/ covellite/chalcopyrite intergrowth to approximately 5a
for covellite. Pyrite is very variable in size from 5 to 150 4
but normally closer to 5m. In the larger size range it is usually

combined in complex form with chalcopyrite.

In tne actual polished sections of samples taken from
West Lagoon Open Pit, specimens are seen to be mainly of one kind
of sulphide but if the paragenesis can be studied by comparing odd composi
sulphide grains it would appear to be gangue > pyrite > chalcopyrite
> bornite/covellite > chalcocite/digenite/covellite. *

4.2 Chemistry

4.2.1 Discussion

Analyses of selected samples from the series were performed
by the C.S.R. Central Laboratory. The methods for determining
chalcocite copper, ‘oxide! copper and chrysocolla copper were
originally worked-up by the Central Laboratory for Gunson ores.
Additionally the laboratory was asked to determine carbonate to
confirm the presence of malachite; phosphate to indicate the
possible presence of pseudomalachite; insoluble chloride to

determine atacamite; and alumina to determine the presence of

kaolinite.

[aves

===== page 26 (ocr)
 

~ 22 - 000181

There was insufficient analysed copper to satisfy all
determined anion component. As no pseudomalachite was
positively identified it was assumed that phosphate present is

unidentifiable calcium phosphate associated with clay cement.

When chrysocolla was determined it was almost certainly
complex-locked with malachite, and the composite grains floated on
the tetrabromethane used as heavy media and which were determined
as chrysocolla only. No alkaline earth carbonates were seen in
thin section so that carbonate determined was certainly malachite

in samples 12, 13A and 13C.

The reported chalcocite copper on samples 1, 2A, 4, 5,
5A, 6A, 6B and 6C unfortunately included chalcopyrite (quite
appreciable in samples 2A, 2B and 6B) and other copper, copper/iron
sulphides present. No particular sulphide mineral could be said to
be specific to Lithic Sandstone or to Red Quartzite owing to post~
deposition supérgene diagenetic alteration of primary sulphides in

both stratigraphic units.

The modal values (volume percent) of minerals given in
the Petrography section 4.1 above are very approximate and were
not given for specimens 9A, 9B and 10 where copper mineral +
proportions vary from thin/polished section to section of the

same sample.

Comparing the modal values with calculated normative
values from chemical composition, they are seen to be grossly at
variance even if the adjustment is made to allow for differences

in specific gravity of the minerals:- .

i) The high result for kaolinite 8.2 percent in specimen 4,
(Table 2), not seen to such a degree in thin section, where
it was estimated at 3 percent indicates that feldspar or other
aluminium silicates are present. However careful perusal of
the section shows kaolinite to be the only aluminium mineral
present. Recalculating volume percent to weight percent changes

significantly

[aoee

===== page 27 (ocr)
 

 

-3- 990182

only quartz:sulphide ratios.

ii) Differences between modal estimates and normative
calculations of sulphides are mainly due to the heterogeneous
distribution (as in coarse bands, specimen 4) and also to micro-
 scopical observation in only one plane of the polished or thin
section. To compare sulphides determined modally with those
calculated from normative compositions it is sufficient in these

rocks to multiply volume percentages of sulphides by 2.

iii) The shortcomings of the chemical method for chrysocolla
have already been discussed. The atacamite normative composition
of specimens 9B, 10A and 10C are far too low compared with

amounts seen in thin section.

42.2 Conclusions

The chemical analyses only confirm the presence of oxide
copper minerals,known to be present from microscopy and X-ray
diffraction. Some analyses (e.g. atacamite where determined) are
so grossly at variance with amounts seen in thin and polished
section as to indicate that further development of analytical
methods: might be necessary. ’

The above comments apply only to those empirical methods
recently developed by the Central Laboratory for determining copper
due to chalecocite, chrysocolla, etc., and does not apply to routine

assay methods.

REFERENCES

1) Pettijohn, F.J. - Sedimentary Rocks
end Edition, Harper & Row.

-2) Williams, H., Turner, F.J. and Gilbert, C.M. ~ Petrography

W.H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco.

3) Love, L.G. - Sulphides of Metals in Recent Sediments.

===== page 28 (ocr)
4)

5)

6)

?)

- 2h - — 000183

Sedimentary ores - Proceedings of the 15th Inter. University

Congress 1967, Ed. by C. James.

Garlick, W.G. ~ Special Features and Sedimentary Facies of
Stratiform Sulphide Deposits in Arenites
Sedimentary ores ~ Proceedings of the 15th Inter. University
Congress 1967, Ed. by C. James.

Whyte, R.J. and Green, M.E. - Geology and Palaeogeography of
Chibuluma West Orebody, Zambian Copperbelt.
Economic Geology 66, 1971, pp. 400-424,

King, Haddon F. - 'Pernatty Lagoon and Mt. Gunson, S.A.'
Consolidated Zinc Pty Ltd. Memo No. 722 1953.

Deleon, G. - Personal communication.

\
&

===== page 29 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 1 4
MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, CHEMICAL ANALYSES (W, ; ) BY CSR CENTRAL LABORATORY
Sample Field Sample Total Total 'Oxide'! Chrysocolla Malachite Chalcocite ALO Pole Insol. Cl
No. No. Cu Fe Cu Cu Cu Cu
A 4000 Mt. Gunson Mill Feed
8.20 am, 15/7/1971 0.66 4.03 0.10 - * 0.56 - * -
A 4001 2A Lithic Sandstone
West Lagoon’ 0.35 0.76 0.01 - ~ 0.34 - a -
A 4005 4 Red Quartzite Ore
. West Lagoon 438 0.09 0.33 - - 4.05 3.23 - -
A 4006 5 Red Quartzite Ore
West Lagoon 2.69 0.18 0.23 ~ - 2.46 - - =
A 4007 5A Lithic Sandstone
: immed., above Red . y .
Quartzite, West Lagoon 9.13 0.39 0.47 ~ - 8.66 2.23 - -
o
A 4008 6A Lithic Sandstone : , ;
West Lagoon 6.66 0.11 0.83 ~ - 5.83 2.04 - ~
A 4009 6B Red Quartzite . : . \
West Lagoon 0.32 0.06 “0.05 - - p 0.28 - - ~
A 4010 6c Red Quartzite : ~ o *
West Lagoon 1.01 0.06 0.21 - a - 0.80 - - -
A 4012 9B Red Quartzite
Main Open Cut 8.34 ~ - 6.44 0.87 N.D. - 0.10 0.3
#
A 4013A 10 Metallurgical +
Test Area 10.31% = - 8.51 0.77 N.D. 0.54 0.15 0.3
A 40130 10 nO 149k ~ - 44.27 N.D. - 0.05 o.4
N.D. : Not detected | . ‘ ~
od :
'Oxide' Cu : Acid soluble copper (non-sulphide) and will include about half Cu O present.

Chrysocolla Cu
Malachite Cu
Chalcocite Cu

TBE float but included originally, malachite locked to crushed chrysocolla grains.

Determined from carbonate analysis as no alkaline earth carbonates were seen in thin-section.

Could include other sulphides present such as chalcopyrite, digenite, bornite and covellite and also half of any tenorite
present.

===== page 30 (ocr)
, TABLE 2 ~ 900185

| MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, CALCULATED MINERAL COMPOSITIONS (FROM CSR CENTRAL LABORATORY ANALYSES)

 

 

 

MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, ee eee eee EE ————————e——EEE—EEE
Sample No. Field No. Sample Chalcocit? Malachite Chrysocolla Atacamite Kaolinite Calcium Phosphate
cad Cc 0 0. i . i
. Cu,s (OH) 60, CuSi0, 2H,0 CuCl, 3Cu(OH), ALO, 28i0,2H.0 Cas (P0,),
ie A 4000 1 Mt. Gunson Mill
ms Feed 8.20 am .
15/7/1971 0.7 ; - - - _ .
A 4001 2A. Lithic Sandstone
West Lagoon 0.4 - oo ~ - .
A 4005 . 4 Red Quartzite Ore _ : .
: West Lagoon 5.1 - - - 8.2 -
} A 4006 5 Red Quartzite Ore
" West Lagoon 3.1 - - - ~ . ~-
A 4007 DSA Lithic Sandstone 4
s above Red
Quartzite, West .
| Lagoon 10.8 - - - 5.6 -
i
A 4008 6A Lithic Sandstone \
West Lagoon 7-3 - - ‘ - 5.2 -
“ »
A 4009 6B Red Quartzite aA . .
West Lagoon Q.4 - - ; - - -
y
A 4010 6c Red Quartzite
West Lagoon 1.0 -~ ~-' =. - -
A 4012 9B Red Quartzite : €
Main Open Cut , - 4.5 17.7 1.8 ~ 0.16
A 4013A 108 Metallurgical /
Test Area - 1.3 23.5 1.8 1.4 0.24

A 4013C 40 Main Open Cut - 1.0 39.4 2.4 -° 0.08

 

