===== page 1 (ocr)
CONTENTS ENVELOPE 6664 Transparencies In
Cylinder 6664/1

TENEMENT HOLDER: Mt. Gunson Mines Pty. Ltd.

REPORTS: Report On Geological Mapping Elizabeth Area, Mt. Gunson. Pgs. 3-11
(Dated Sydney 10/8/71 - J.M. Chisholm).

PLANS: Pernatty Lagoon - Geology. 6664-1
Elizabeth Area - Geology (1). 6664-2
Elizabeth Area - Geology (2). 6664-3

Mt. Gunson Workings Area - Bedrock Lithology (Compiled From 6664-4
Hole Drill Data).

Mt. Gunson Workings Area - Contours On Upper Surface Of 6664-5
Woolcalla Dolomite And Shale.
Canegrass Dam Area - Geology. 6664-6
Eastern Canegrass Area - Geology. 6664-7
Central Mining Area - Outcrop And Bedrock Geology - 6664-8
Cu Geochem: Top Of LSS.
S.M.L. 641 - Wirrappa Area - Geology. 6664-9
Elizabeth River Delta Area - Plans (1). 6664-1(T)
(2). 6664-2(T)
(3). 6664-3(T)
Elizabeth Area - Geology Base Map. 6664-4(T)
“Mt. Gunson Workings Area - Geology. 6664-5(T)
Canegrass Dam Area - Geology Base Map. 6664-6(T)
Mt. Gunson Workings Area - Bedrock Lithology And Mineral 6664-7(T)

Trends With Cu Mineralization And Lithology As Revealed
By Latest Drilling Programme (1971).

 

===== page 2 (ocr)
REPORT ON GEOLOGIC MAPPING

GUNSON S.A.

ELIZABuTH AREA, MT.

PACHMINEX PTY LTD

Dated in Sydney
10/8/71

Prepared by: dJeM. Chisholm.

%

900003

4

===== page 3 (ocr)
CONTENTS

INLRODUCTION
STRAT IG 2APHY
LITHOLOGY
SEDIMENTATION
STRUCTURE

ECONOMIC POTENTIAL

MAPS * . os

Figs 1 = Nt. Gunson ~ Elizabeth Arca

G
'
>
t ,
5 “
'

/ N00004: «

PAGS

N DD +

ee te etter nen a at mae:

 

 

===== page 4 (ocr)
 

Eeport to acconzany the Blivbeth Ares Nap 800005
INPRObUCTION

The area covered in the mapping programme extends from the
Elizabeth River, north of Pernatty Lagoon to the Vestern section of
Bonney Bluff. Most of the arca is covered by dune sand but Sufficient
eutcrop is available for mapoing. Silicification of the various
lithologies makes it very difficult to identify the rock in hand
specimen. In the vicinity of Bonney 5luff the stratigraphic

relationships are masked by transported debris and erosional remnants.

The main aim of the programme was to test the possibility
of the area being a suitable host environment for copper mineralisation.
The exploration hypothesis used was that the copper mineralisation occurs

in tectonic and/or topographic depressions in the Pandurra Formation.e

STRATIGRAPHY

With the exception of the Woocalla Dolomite there isa
complete stratigraphic sequence from the Rod Quartzites of the Pandurra
Formation through to the orthoquartzites of the Simmens Quartzite Men=

ber. The stratigraphic relationships are shown belov:~ .

  

Simmens

  
     

Quartzite

  
 

Corraberra
Tent Hill

Formation

  
  

Sandstone

  

Qvogolana

 
      

Shale

   

Whyalla sts!

    
  

i

  
 

Pandurra Pandurra

   

Formation Formation

 
 

Me

  

 

 

===== page 5 (ocr)
"en : ~ 900006

As mentioned carlier, there were conplications due to

wused uncertainty in

 

silicification and transported debris which

 

napping the stratigrapnic scquence The boundary vetivocen the Tre-
Golana Shale nembes and the overlying Corrabucra Sandsione Member

is transitional and ics arbitrarily placea at a boundar; whore the

sand content decreases below 25%. Where silification masks the

grain sizes, and relative proportions of silt and sand it is impossible

to ascertain the identity of the rock unit. ‘The more resistant nature

of the silicified litholosies has caused them to remain as erosion .
relics after tho softer Giltstones and mudatones havo been removed
and it is common to find areas of younger row: that appear to be

lower ey than older less resistant strata. This is

<

caused by le tant sediments being preferentially eroded from

 

below a resistant. bed which remains after the underlying bed is
removed. The prime exanple of this is at Bonney Bluff where flaggy
quartzites of the Simmens Quartzite Heaber appear to occur below the
Corraberra Sandstone Memoer in the form of an apron around the Bluff.

Pandurra Formation - Considerable lithological variation
ane eon

occurs within this formation with the occurrence of ‘friable, coarse ~
sandstones, gritty sandstones, pebbly sandstones and’ Boulder con= ?
gGlomeratese Two units were delincated on‘the basis of colour and
grain size. The lover unit is the characteristic red, coarse grained
often gritty quartzite which comprises most of the Pandurra Formation.
Conformably above the rid colcured quartzite there occurs a white-
buff-purple quartzite that is in part a friable sandstone. The white
and buff quartzites ave medium to cearse Geained bret generally equi-
grantlar within any bed, 4 boulder congdonercla has been included’
in this unit although the exact relationship is uncertain. There is

a possibility that the conglonerate is of fluvial origin much younger
than the other Pandurra Formations on account of its distribution.
Orly boulders of Pandurra Formation lithologies occur as clasts in >
the conglomerate.

  

 

 

===== page 6 (ocr)
 

oor 900007

‘Whyalla Sandstone Member = A thin strata of heavily Mn-Fe /
indurated lithic sandstone occurs unconformably above the Pandurra
Formations Rounding of the grains is excepticaal and at the base
there occur angular clasts of red quartzite which are typically not
subjected to lMn-Fe induration. ‘here is an edserved gentle dip to-
wards the iB (ise. basinwards away from the ancient land macs) existing

during deposition of this unit).

  

Trepolana Shale Member = The boundary between the underlying
Whyalla Sandstone is not seen in outcrop but is seen to be conformable
in the Gunyah Lake area to tho south. ‘The upver boundary with the
Corraberra Sandstone is transitional which causes difficulty in field
identification. This member is composed of a sequence of mudstones,
siltstones and silty sandstones which show a wide variation in colour.
Generally the mudstones are green, red and purple with white coloration
where weathering has bleached the sediments. Fine grained sandstone
interbeds occur within the sequence and these show considerable con=
tortion (ball and pillow structures, load casts) due to plastic
deformation of the sediments shortly after deposition (early diagenesis).

‘yas 1 Ft we
In one outcrop the argillaccous sediments are folded due to,

" slumpinge The Tregolana Shale Member is equivalent to the Woomera ,

Shale Member of Johns (1968).
Corraberra Sandstone Menber ~ Conformably overlies the

Tregolana Shale with a transitional boundary. This sequence con-

sists of siltstones, sandy siltstones, sandstones and quartzites

that are frequently cross~bedded. ‘he sedimunto ave flat lying and:
pass conformably into the overlying sandstones and quartzites of the

Simmens Quartzite Menber.

’

Simmens Quartzite Member - Equivalent to the Arcoona
Quartzite (Johns 1968) and forms the capping for the residual remnants
of the Arcoona Plateaus In outcrop the quartzites appear as flaggy
blocks that are very recistant.to weathering aud give a false impress-

ion as to the nature and affinity of the underlying bedrock.

 

===== page 7 (ocr)
~4- 900008 ,
os a . ? m%
In the vicinity of Pernatty Lagoon the only outcrops of Sinmens

Quarteite are on Mt. Gunson and Bonney Bluff.

hand Surfaces - Three land surfaces are evident and they
aret-
(4) Present day land surfaces which show medium relief.

(2) Tertiary land surface that shows up as a flat lying
plane over which there is a marked silicification
with the result that the land surface is now repre-
sented by remnant mesase At one outcrop there
occurred a fossilised pisolitic laterite profile
which indicates that the climate in the area was
probably once tropical-sub tropical. The laterite
development is up to 4-5 fect in thickness with
rourded grains of heaatite (considerable size 4

variation) cemented by a limonite - jarosite stained 4

 

Silica. .

(3) Mesozoic land surface which is found at the top of
. the ancient Arcoona Plateau and is ayproximatelys&00e~0
900 feet above sea level, - : .. ; 8
LITHOLOGY oat ,
Pandurra Formation - Composed primarily of subangular to
Sub-rounded quartzite grains with evidence of some geldspar minerals
having been present. Any feldspar that was present has been heavily
altered with only remnants of clay winerals remaining to fill the voids.
The clasts that occur in the grits and anartuiten indicate the nature
of the distributive province and are mainly acid volcanics, chert,
Jasper and milky quartz. The composition of the boulgers in the
conglomerate are different in that ‘they consist of older red quartzite.
Silicification has masked the grain sizes and replaced the caly minerals

to give the rocks the appearance of clean, quartz-rich quartzites.

“

 

===== page 8 (ocr)
. 75 — 900009.

- The blucky of red quartsite (Panduvra

 

Mbyall a San i

 

 

Formation) that oscur at the base of the sandstone have been
fied and exnibit liesgang rings whereas the sandstcue dees note The

ndstone consists of e:treacly well rounced arts grains in which

the silicified quarte

   

of sorting is vell advanced.

 

zite below and a midstone above the Vryalla eandstone has acted as

 

an aquifer to aqueous solutions. Th at by the heavy iron
q

and manganese staining throujhout the exposed outcrop.

 

sequence of sedis mts passes fron

 

fine grained laninated mudstones theousgh interbedded susdstones and
mudstones to a silty sandstone, Close examination of the mudstone
sequence shows that fine-grained, sundstene layers, which coutain
both well rounded and anjulur quarts grains, occur within the lamin-

 

ations of fine grained wegillaceous material. Within the argillaceous
material there can be seen beth wmierc-convolutions and micro~faults.
The sandstone interbeds towards the top of the sequence have a

bimodal distribution of crain sizes with an avgillaceous matrix
filling voids between the well rounded quartz srains. The argilla-
ceous material is thought to be due to diugenctic remobilisation-of “>

Material following ceposition., an we

Transition - Tne beundury betwesan the Tregolana Shale and
the overlying Corraberra Sandstone is fixed at 25/5 sand content but
the variability of the s-diments makes this boundary very transitoryve
A close examinaticn of samples selected from this transition some
shoved a silicified silty sandstone containing well rounded grains,

in one ¢enso ar

 

Lap, with 5 oo aygitlnccous matertaly — 9 + f

 

sequence consists of a micaceous

 

quartzite at the base ¢ sove whith is a purple

 

sandy siltstone with a
micaccous, crossheddcd, surple sandstone at the tops The lower mica-

ceons sundstone is a fine grained quarts udstone interbedéed with

 

siltstone. The angular giains are close th some scricite to

 

give a clean sanéstone, svove this is a purple even grained quartz-

soricite siltstone interbedded with a fine Grained sandstone, The

af

 

===== page 9 (ocr)
6-0 600010
upper pruple sandstone Gontains medium grained quartz, muscovite,
sericite and iron stained argillaceous matter derived through the

breakdown of feldspar minerals.

ite ~ Geacraliy cream and white fine grained

 

  

orthoquartzites in which tue yruins are well rounded but silicifica-

   

tion tends to mask the texturee Some heavy minerals (possibly tourmaline)
occur and a small amount of argillaccous iaterial occurs interstiticly.
Interbeds of quartzite which contain significant feldspar remnants occure
Generally the Simmens Quartzite is better sorted, finer grained, more |
rounded, contains no mica and has lees argillaccous material than the

Corraberra Sandstone.

SEBINENTATION

the result of a marine

 

The pattern of sedimentation

 

transgression followed by a partial regression, Following ceyvosit-
ion of the Pandurra Forration there occurred noverent which terminated
sedimentation and initial erosion. Deposition of the eroded Pandurra
clastic material resulted in the Whyalla Sandstone and as the trans-
gression progressed these changed to saudstones and siltstones of the-«
Tregolana Shales. From the upper part of the Tregolana Shales there
was a trend in which the sediments becawe beti.er sorted and rounding

improved as the crosion cycle reached maturity until the clean ortho-

 

quartzites of the S stzite were deposited.

STRUCTURE

Two structual events are evident but neither is thought to

a of the Pancurra Fornation in

 

be majore One dneludes the Tibaolori
which slight folding hac undwiated the strata thus producing variations

in dip and strike reading. Phere is however a regional dip for the

 
 

3

 

Pandurra Formation. Shevrins en and uinor faulting occurs with

: . 5 : 4 : °
che dips of strata ¢isrunted adjacent to the foults being up to 30°.

 

event included all of the post-Pandurra litholo~

gies. There is a regic al dip to the SZ resulting from onion of

 

   

===== page 10 (ocr)
"ee 600011

of Youngs Formation on-to the Pandurra Lithologics but is not thought
to exceed 5°. Within the sediments of the Tent Mill formation there.
are broad shallow synelinal and anticlinal structures with minor tight

folds possibly caused by slunping.

ECONOHTC POPE ITAL
A working hypothesis is that the distribution of copper
mineralisation is controlled by permeability of host rock, ground

dons, structure of the depositional environment.

 

water condi

On this hypothesis thore is only one aren, that is regardcd

 

ion for mineralisation in the Elizabeth area. This
is in the Whyalla Sandstone that outcrop along the mouth of the Blisa-
beth River. ‘The sandstones vere once permcable and would have acted
as an aquifor between the red quartzites and the overlying shales.

As the regional dip is to the SH there would within the basin be

diated

 

Eh/pH conditions where any copper in solution vould be precir
oute It is unlikely that any copper vould still be forming as the
heavy iron ~ wancanese formation has markedly reduced the permeability

of the sandstones. te

It is proposed that a few exploration holes be drilled through
the Tregolana Shile into frech Whyalla Sandstone. The location of these
heles irould be in the vicinity of vhere the Mt. Gunson~Yeltacowie road
crosses the Flizabeth River as access to the areca to the south east would
be restricted to an airtracl: and compressor.

te and podlouelane bub is of.

 

Maaganese occurs as pyroli

    

miificient extent to be of interest. euatito occurs in the

daterite soil profile but is again very restricted in extent. Lilitic
wd kaolinitie clays occuc in the pallid zone of the Tresolona Shales

appears to be similar in quality to that being quarried at

  

zine Hill ne

 

 

===== page 11 (ocr)
 

MT. GUNSON

PERNATTY

 
 

langanese
Workings

   
    

"cf

S

§

\

|RONSTONE
LAGOON

 

a

   

LAGOON

A BONNEY BLUFF

A
PERNATTY
RIDGE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lake and claypan deposits

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HL] Aliuvium gravels and silts
0 G7 | 5 Sand pains and dunes
[ oS! ° 6} Stream deposits: boulder beds, ferrugous grits
—-—4
| Si | Silicified cappings
Q
“K|__] White Kootinitic siltstones
TENT HILL FORMATION
sa Simmens Quartzite Member
a co
| uy Corraberra Sandstone Member
- = ri S| Tregolana Shale Member
Rs ae
oe ae
ie ore L L Whyalla Sandstone
a ~ ¢
ig
ee
\ » ee D Woocalla Dolomite
/
\ /
Zt
o Sek.
ight R Pandurra Formation
\ ov
\ 4 ~
\ \ ae MOUNT GUNSON MINES PTY LTD
= / »
NTA aS}
} Bs
x
# GEOLOCY
*
/-
/ \ SCALE: 1: 50,000 DRAWN: RKY | owG ne
{ \ GEOLOGY: | CHECKED: |
\ \ SURVEYED:
\ \ DATE: 23-8-71 iy

 

 

 

Revisen 23-S- 73

