===== page 1 (ocr)
3

 
  

       

 

 

 
  
 

 

 

lL

  

. . [Copper. | Ratio |Assay . |

No. |Foorage|Covour |AsGREGATE. | MiWeRacs. MINERALS |Sulph:O.Satts] % Cu. | Remar ) |

G2.| Sach chips | Cle Kaolin [Not nbh | L. Sastona...-|

White lof A Sone... Gupsuwa.Clay.. ee - ee .
Rounded quarig) wo ee

_4

~1o! Off uhite),

of Whike De.
G4.

 

 

Che 15st |
gee well aumled ,

As above

Asabove.

 

 

 

io -is' OG white] Bs above.
16-20 Yallowish| Well vounded
cee jp en (Oras of Qefe.. | —
32 lz! -2.$' berlin. —
IBs2 |2s'~2d OG White]! ~— »—
1353 [2o'~as" |Brewrish| As above +. _|_-
Chinn Rabie
Fre Haine
Poof ee
|... B84 88" ~a0! [Feide. pls
|. Gua.
po pn ' . manor. clay «
lass acreage (Re |
[lisse last- ed hes
|... |iss7 ed st]
_ ss4 lex =e Lt
[| as'9 ee as. tpen= _

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Malachite |
. aCbolese te

 

_ |NetWefed. | a

 

 
 
  

A. SStowe,

JL. S8tene,

4 §
Behe

 

R. Gy ihe

 

 

 

  
 
 

“phic.

  

 

990062. |

1A. SStone . |

|Z. Sita. |

Rite, |

Rees Te | |

a

4

| PEL Se 7 |

 

===== page 2 (ocr)
 

 

FOOTAGE.

CoLOUR JAGGREGATE.

 

 

CopPerR,
MINERALS

   

 

 

 

U25— 130

0 2 8 Ae!
14s" 150
180 155
/sS~Ieo
(60-178)

 

 

Bow i2s|

130 13e-| "*
74 |e mo]

J \Ie' -1gd]

 

 

 

 

  
  

s | -a5" |Fuk,
lestved| oo lofQeerte. |
leo jag]
4 | jor d|
g\ud- us|
> Just 20]

 

 

 

TE

i)

R Bros ta,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 3 (ocr)
Ref. No. PMR. 195/72

000084

PACMINEX PTY LIMITED

PETROGRAPHY OF MOUNT GUNSON SEDIMENTS

PART I SURFACE CHARACTERISTICS OF QUARTZ GRAINS

PART II A PETROGRAPHIC STUDY BY THIN-SECTION

SYDNEY P.J. CURTIS
October, 1972.

===== page 4 (ocr)
me

mm

7 Copy No.

000065

DISTRIBUTION
Copy
LIBRARY Original
P.C. THOMAS
J.H. RATTIGAN / ‘ 1
R.W. GERSTELING 2
P.J. CURTIS 3

J. HEAPE a/v

===== page 5 (ocr)
A

PART

I SURFACE CHARACTERISTICS OF QUARTZ GRAINS

INTRODUCTION
SUMMARY
DISCUSSION
MICROSCOPY

REFERENCES

II A PETROGRAPHIC STUDY BY THIN-SECTION

 

INTRODUCTION

‘SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS

DISCUSSION SUMMARY

DESCRIPTION OF SECTIONS

REFERENCES

000066

PAGE _NO.

13
44
22
36

75

===== page 6 (ocr)
. ~ | 000067

PART _I

Surface characteristics of quartz grains from the
Pandurra. Quartzite and Whyalla Sandstone, Mt. Gunson Prospect.

===== page 7 (ocr)
. - 000068

1. INTRODUCTION

During June 1972 the writer undertook a field
investigation for 8 days at Mt. Gunson. Part of the time was
spent sampling percussion drill samples of Pandurra Quartzite
and Whyalla Sandstone from various parts of the mineral leases.
The samples were dry screened to + 10 mesh and the + 10 mesh
fractions were examined under a low power stereomicroscope to
study surface characteristics of the quartz mineral grains.

Jones

===== page 8 (ocr)
. -2- 000069

2. SUMMARY

2.1 The Pandurra Quartzite and Whyalla Sandstone
are each remarkably uniform over wide areas.

2.2 The Pandurra Quartzite is mainly a poorly sorted
but fine-grained quartzite. Thin individual grains are
quite non-uniform, irregular and angular or at the best,
subangular. The grains have clear surfaces mostly but -
occasionally are lightly frosted and frequently are tinted
pink by adhering hematite particles. The original cement

of hematite and clay has been largely replaced by quartz.

2.3 The Whyalla Sandstone is largely of aeolian

origin intermixed with lacustrine silt and clay. The

grains are in most cases quite round by surface frost,

scour and sub-parallel scratching of the grains (particularly
the large crystals) indicate anaeolian origin for them.

Some intermixing with subangular littoral dune sand is

“geen and absence of aeolian false bedding and the presence

of much clay/hematite matrix indicated removal by flood-
water of the dune sand and intermixing with adjoining playa
lake mud and re-deposition near the strand line in flood

channels.

[owes

===== page 9 (ocr)
. -3- 800070

3. DISCUSSION

Sampling of Pandurra Quartzite and Whyalla Sandstone

from percussion drill holes over a large area including areas

adjoining the Mill, at Gunyah Lake, the House; and further
afield from the Cattle Grid and Cane Grass Dam shows that the
two stratigraphic units are quite distinct.

3.1

The Pandurra Quartzite grains show :-

3.1.1 Irregular water-worn grains as channel-
fill or estuarine deposits dumped on the edge of
a once sharply rising hinterland and as such are
poorly sorted;

3.1.2 Any frosting of these grains is slight and
is due to attenuated buffeting of the grains in a
water medium;

3.1.3 Subsequent diagenesis after sedimentation
and compaction has caused the quartz grains ‘to be
welded together by silica addition, or by replacement
of existing clay and hematite from percolating waters
containing silica, the mosaic being interrupted only
by a little residual kaolin,hematite or sulphide

cement.
Whyalla Sandstone is distinct in that :-

3.2.1 Tt is a sandstone containing a great deal

of clay/sericite/hematite matrix;

3.2.2 The maximum overall grain size is
comparatively large and the grains are frequently
perfectly round, show heavy £rosting, scour and
sub-parallel scratches which are most likely the

result of aeolian influences since the degree and

[wees

===== page 10 (ocr)
. 800071

-.4-

type of attrition is similar to that observed in

desert dune sands;

3.2.3 However, the large amount of fine matrix
present suggests secondary deposition of this dune
sand by flood-waters to include additional fine

material from adjoining playa lakes;

3.2.4. Sizing of the quartz grains at the transfer
stage was already completed by the previous aeolian
activity and maintenance of a more or less graded
sequence shows the short distance travelled to

redeposition;

- 3.42.5 Resettling in water, is indicated by the
presence of large clasts and absence of aeolian
false bedding (Ref. 1).

Quartz grains with a secondary growth of silica in
optical continuity with the detrital nucleus (Ref. 2) is
characteristic of the Pandurra Quartzite and occurs best in
open sands with no interstitial cement when the secondary
silica assumes a remarkably good crystalline form (Ref. 3) In
this situation it probably shows a prolonged deposition of sand
grains under water which is not very deep since the deposition
of secondary silica indicated proximate alkaline waters
changing to slightly acid or neutral pH waters in the.zone of
deposition. Taking into account the poor sorting of the grains
and the hypothesis of a sharply rising hinterland to explain
this, a high proportion of fine silt and clay matrix would be
expected but has seemingly been washed out by strong current
action or was removed during the subsequent diagenetic phase.

The presence of subangular as well as of rounded
frosted grains in the Whyalla Sandstone may show some exchange
of aeolian and littoral grains by coastal dunes by wind action

[osee

===== page 11 (ocr)
. 5 _ 800072

with those from desert dunes more remote from the strand
(Refs. 2 and 5).

Pettijohn (Ref. 4) suggests that the frosting of sand

‘ grains is due to aeolian action and that a sand of mixed

parentage will contain grains with a diversity of textural
features and that the last epoch of transportation and
deposition was inadequate to erase the surface markings of
previous cycles. Thus the elimination of frost from some of
the Whyalla grains and elongation of some grains with some
gouging may indicate an overprint of aeolian conditions onto
characteristics of severe water-worn activity. A fine vitreous
glaze or polish (Ref. 4) formed by fine particles sand-blasting
quartz grains is seen in the Whyalla Sandstone but is not common
possibly because when present it was removed by subsequent
diagenesis after deposition of the grains in water.

According to Margolis and Krinsley (Ref. 5) who /
collected desert and coastal dune sands of aeolian origin from
20 localities around the world, chemical solution and re-
deposition of silica by the action of desert dew along with
mechanical wind abrasion are factors contributing towards
frosting and rounding of sand grains. The deep-pitting of
the Whyalla grains associated with the frosting which frequently
predominates at projecting corners or edges if the grain has a
tendency to be subangular, suggests dominant wind induced grain
impacts as the agent responsible for the shape and appearance
of these grains. .

Frosting and rounding in aeolian attrition is
generally more intense with the larger grains according to
Kuenen quoted by Margolis and Krinsley (Ref. 5) and Kuenen
also stated that rounding is primarily of mechanical aeolian
origin. Margolis and Krinsley demonstrated experimentally that

diagenesis may defrost sand grains.

fees

===== page 12 (ocr)
800073

. Where the dune sand grains are iron stained as per
present-day sand dunes at Mt. Gunson it occurs during long
periods of reduced wind activity as significant abrasion would
remove it from the surface of the grains. Iron staining of the
Whyalla Sandstone grains is quite uncommon due to the steady
attrition which occurred by continuous wind activity prior to
subsequent deposition in shallow water.

4. MICROSCOPY

4.1 Pandurra Quartzite

4.1.1 House Workings
Welded pink graihs mainly clear but some

larger grains are lightly frosted. The individual
grains average between 0.2 and 1.0 mm (mainly 0.5 mm)
and are poorly sorted, mainly angular though some
rounded grains occur and grains do vary from quite
angular to rounded in shape. The cement is generally
quartz, thus fractures occur through grains and matrix
in rock fragments rather than through soft matrix as
in the Whyalla Sandstone. However not all the
cementing material is quartz and where kaolinite >
hematite/limonite > sericite are intergranular cements,
euhedral forms as pyramids or prisms can be seen as

overgrowths on otherwise angular grains.

4.1.2 Gunyah Lake

Similar to the Pandurra Quartzite examined
from the House Workings but the rock cement (apart
from quartz) is largely hematite. The quartz grains
are irrequiar in shape and size, poorly sorted, with
mainly clear surfaces but with some slight frosting

of grain surfaces locally.

[aves

===== page 13 (ocr)
cod

4.2

- ae 900074

4.1.3 Mount _Gunson Traverse

As for the 'House Workings'; poorly sorted
grains; variation in shape with many angular grains
and wide variation in size from 0.1 to 1 mn. Grain
cement (apart from quartz) is largely hematite with

some kaolin.

4.1.4 Cane Grass Dam

The grains are more frequently faintly
frosted on their surfaces, are irregular and angular,
average 0.4 mm and vary between 0.2 and 1 mm. Apart

-from quartz, sericite is the common grain cement.

Some euhedral overgrowths are seen on grains which
line fissures or cavities in the quartzite. One
specimen (66327) tends to have a lower average grain
size (0.2 mm), the grains being rounded to sub-angular
and are well sorted. The grains also have clear

surfaces.

4.1.5 Cattle Grid

There is gross contamination by Whyalla
Sandstone in these samples, but most grains are
angular and of variable size (0.1 to several mm's).
The grains are mainly clear with minimal matrix
(cement), mainly of quartz or sericite (some hematite
and sulphide). Some of the larger grains show faintly
frosted surfaces.

Whyalla Sandstone

4.2.1 House Workings
The matrix is rich in kaolinite and some

limonite. The quartz grains are colourless, and
mainly rounded with minor subangular/rounded grains
with surfaces pitted and uniformly frosted, although
some of the smaller grains tend to have some clear

Loess

===== page 14 (ocr)
e- 900075

surface areas. Grain size tends to be somewhat
larger than in the Pandurra Quartzite varying in
one sample between 0.5 to 3 mms and in another
between 0.2 and 1 mm. Overgrowths on worn

surfaces of euhedral forms is seen occasionally
but is uncommon. Limonite constitutes the matrix
of a cherty horizon containing some possible gypsum
and found.only once during the whole investigation.

4.2.2 Gunyah_ Lake

Matrix again is heavy with kaolinite and
some sericite. The grains in this deposit tend to
be large (2 to several mm's), are well frosted and
round to subangular/fround; smaller grains again are
particularly clear at surface. Large 'impact' pits
up to 0.1 mm are seen on the large grains and
occasionally have ‘amoeboid-like'. protrusions which
show frequently clear surfaces, (secondary, euhedral
due to diagenesis ?).

One specimen (48887) contains large sub-
angular grains, finely frosted with large ‘impact'
pits and the grains are 2 to 5 mm's in size. These
grains show clear surfaces at edges and corners.

4.2.3 Mount _Gunson Traverse

| Matrix in these samples which is fairly
abundant is hematite and kaolinite with a tendency
for the hematite to stick to grain surfaces
(diagenetic phenomenon). The grain size tends to be
somewhat smaller with many being less than 0.4 mm in
diameter maximum up to 1 mm. However one sample is
predominantly fine grained but ranges up to 3 mms.
Large grains irregular, rounded, (>0.5 mm diameter)
are uniformly heavily frosted but small grains (>0.5
mms) are subangular to sub-rounded but with finely
etched surfaces. Euhedral overgrowths producing a

Joes

===== page 15 (ocr)
 

 

: 080076

” _9-

clear surface are seen on some smaller grains.

Sorting of the grains is fair.

4.2.4 Cane Grass Dam

Again, abundant matrix of kaolinite with
hematite or kaolinite alone. Grain sizes in samples
vary; in one sample approximately 0.5 mm and in all
others between 1 and 5 mms; rounded, particularly
the larger grains and somewhat flat/rounded and with
gouged-out undersurfaces in the larger grains.
Frosting and pitting of grain surfaces is common and
is intense at corners and edges of some sub-angular
grains (sample 66252) and this sample also contains
rounded chert pebbles (approximately 0.5 mm diameter).
A proportion of grains with clear surfaces are seen
in sample 66843 and 66313 where the average grain
size is smaller (approximately 0.5 mm for sample
66313). Really large pits on surfaces occur in
sample 66358 where the average grain size is
approximately 3 mms diameter. Sorting is better in
the finer grained samples (e.g. 66483). Some euhedral
overgrowths are seen on smaller grains.

4.2.5 Cattle Grid

The matrix in these samples is largely
abundant sericite and/or kaolinite; in one case
(66719) hematite in addition to sericite and
kaolinite; and where silicified (67897), it is
quartz. The grain size limits are variable from
sample to sample at <0.5 mm; 0.2 to 1 mm; 0.5 to
1 mm; and 1 to 5 mm. The larger grains tend to be
subangular to rounded, coarsely frosted, pitted,
gouged and scratched. Large deep pits on large
grains occur at the expense of the finely frosted
surface. Angular grains (sample 67933), up to 1.5

mms, show greater frosting at edges and corners of

[eves

===== page 16 (ocr)
 

. ~ 10 -~ 800077

the grains. Large rounded cherts are also seen in

sample 67933, and all shapes of Whyalla Sandstone

quartz grains, from angular to subangular to round,
averaging 0.5 mm are seen in this sample. Smaller
grains tend to be more angular and less frosted but
grains frequently show some pitting and scratches.

A varnish is seen on some part-frosted grains (67718,
67934) which is not related to matrix composition.
Euhedral overgrowths on quartz grains are seen but
are noted only where secondary silicification has
taken place (67897). Sorting in all size ranges is
fair to good.

4.2.6 Coogee Beach Sand
Two samples were taken, one from the

foreshore near the undercliff on the north side of
the bay and another from low tide level on the beach,
not far from the first sample.

Both samples show angular to subangular
sand grains averaging around 0.3 mm diameter, The
larger sand grains do show some light frosting and
pitting on projecting and level surfaces and similar
to the Whyalla Sandstone the frosting is mainly
confined to the larger grains. However scouring
and scratching of the grains is noticeably absent
from the beach sand.

The beach sand grains are generally finer,
more angular and less frosted, (the larger grains in
particular), than the Whyalla Sandstone grains
although some frosting and pitting are seen on beach

sand grains.

Joos

===== page 17 (ocr)
las 000078

4.2.7 Mount Gunson Dune Sand

Two samples were taken, one from a dune
situated between the Mill and House Workings (over
inferred Woocalla Dolomite); the other from a dune
a few hundred yards south-east of the House Workings
situated upon inferred Whyalla Sandstone/Pandurra
Quartzite. These samples were seen not to be typical
desert dune sand in that sizing of the grains is poor,
varying between 0.1 and 1 mm with an average size of
0.4 mm. The grains are subangular to rounded as for
the Whyalla Sandstone. Sub-parallel scratches occur
roughly parallel to the long axis of the grains
(where the grains are ovoid in shape), and gouging
and pitting of faces of large grains is seen. Frosting
of larger grains is more common than for the smaller
grains. Many grains have a surface stain of hematite
which tends to give them a polished look. Frosting
is generally not so heavy as for the Whyalla sand
grains. However, the shape, size, presence of an
overall 'frost' on the larger grains, scratching and
gouging of surfaces would indicate the grains to be
derived from the Whyalla Sandstone and it is hoped
that dune sands from the Mount Gunson area well away
from the Whyalla Sandstone may shortly be sampled and
studied.

[owes

===== page 18 (ocr)
 

ede es 900079

REFERENCES

CHISHOLM, J. Personal communication.

CURTIS, P.J. Pacminex Report No. 270/71. 'A Petrographic/
Minerographic Examination of some Mount Gunson Ore
Samples from West Lagoon and Main Open Pits.

HATCH, F.H. R.H. Rastall and Maurice Black, 1952 - The
Petrology of the Sedimentary Rocks - Pub. Thomas
Murby and Co., London.

PETTIJOHN, F.J. 1957 - Sedimentary Rocks - Pub. Harper
& Row, N.Y.

MARGOLIS, S.V. & KRINSLEY, D.H. 1971 - Submicroscopic
Frosting on Eolianand Subaqueous Quartz Sand Grains -
Geological Society of America Bulletin, 82, pp.3395-
3406.

===== page 19 (ocr)
5 —- g99080

PART II

A petrographic study of rocks from the Pandurra
Quartzite and Tent Hill formations of the Mount Gunson area.

v

===== page 20 (ocr)
sR | 000081

1. INTRODUCTION

 

During the June 1972 visit to Mount Gunson part. of
the time was spent in sampling diamond drill cores and
inspecting and sampling some exposures of Pandurra Quartzite
and Whyalla Sandstone. The specimens were thin sectioned and
where appropriate polished sections were prepared.

[ove

===== page 21 (ocr)
 

 

 

-14- - 900082

2. -SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS .

2.1 Pandurra Quartzite

SO 2.1.1 Main Open Pit

(i)

(ii)

(4a)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Abundant diagenetic transformation of
originally subangular to rounded quartz grains
to angular grains by addition of quartz is seen
where quartz extends beyond hematite particle
trains and fluid inclusions but within the over-
growths; this added quartz is in optical continuity
with the nucleus and is deposited from meteoric
waters with resultant replacement of original

matrix minerals.

Large quartz rock fragments as erratics
occur and the smaller quartz mineral and rock
grains are poorly sorted, yet occasional very.
rough sorting into coarse and finer bands is seen.

Strained and unstrained grains are not
structurally orientated in the 'quartzite' fabric
and the strained grains with many quartz gneiss
fragments seen in the rock are assumed to be
derived from a metamorphic source or provenance.

Chert grains are not prominent in this
stratigraphic unit.

Kaolinite matrix is seen where not replaced
by chert or + quartz.

Replacement of kaolinite matrix by cherty
.cement is common.

(vii) Replacement of atacamite by < quartz and

vice versa indicates solution and redeposition

of copper values during diagenesis.

[owes

===== page 22 (ocr)
pw BB 900083

2.1.2 West Lagoon

(i) very similar texturally to the Main Open
Pit.

(ai) Large quartz rock clasts occur.

(iii) If the few specimens collected are

indicative then deposition of “ quartz rather
than chert (as at the Main Open Pit) to replace
soft matrix is common, suggestive of a more
'reducing' and less ‘oxidizing' post depositional

conditions were operative.

2.1.3 Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon

‘

(i) A 'greywacke' type with abundant fine-
grained matrix - although most of the latter
has been replaced by chert.

(ii) A multi-chambered 'foraminiferal-looking'
organism is seen in the 'greywacke-type’ sediment.

(iii) Abundant matrix (primary kaolinite or
secondary chert) appears to be typical of the
Pandurra Quartzite in the Mystery deposits.

(iv) A relatively high quartz rock fragments to
quartz mineral grains ratio is typical.

(v) Poor sorting is seen but no ‘rough-banding'
as seen in the Main Open Pit samples.

(vi) Ubiquitous quartz gneiss fragments but no
metamorphic heavy minerals (kyanite, sillimanite,

staurolite, etc).

(vii) Abundance of playa-lake matrix should point
to the presence of some syngenetic/epigenetic
sulphides.

Lovee

===== page 23 (ocr)
2.2

x 080084

” - 16 -
2.1.4 Woocalla Quarry
(i) Relatively large variation in grain size,

poorly sorted.

(ii) Where possible to see primary grain
boundaries the grains are quite round.

(iii) Cherty matrix is present but primary chert
grains are not abundant..

(iv) There is a lack of soft clay matrix.

(v) There are a few rock fragments. Poor
sorting, lack of heavy minerals, rounding of
primary quartz nuclei indicate an abundance of

recycled quartz grains.

2.1.5 Mona Lena

Repetitive (from base to top) coarse
angular pebbles, sand then silt shows sporadic
nature of flash floods which washes clastic material

into estuarine channels.
Woocalla Dolomite

2.2.1 Sweet Nell

The Basal Shale is mineralised with
chalcopyrite which has recrystallised with coarse
quartz and carbonate in laminae and is therefore
secondary. Possibly precipitated originally under
reducing conditions with dolomitic mud. Apparently
this is not a typical Basal Shale specimen since it

is normally quite argillaceous.

2.2.2 Woocalla Quarry
The dolomite is patchy in appearance wit
manganese wad dendrites which were exsolved from a

Jvaes

===== page 24 (ocr)
 

7 17a Q00085

manganiferous dolomite during weathering and
recrystallisation of the carbonate. Copper does

“not readily substitute for calcium or magnesium and

is unlikely to occur in the dolomite lattice and in
the absence of argillaceous matter or sulphides it
is difficult to place.

2.2.3 Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon

(i) Dr. Barnet of Central Laboratory identified
the carbonate sediment as (Ca, Mg, Mn) (CO3)4-

(ii) From the limited number of specimens
examined from the Mystery area the dolomite
is seen to be very pure with only traces of
chert and no argillaceous minerals. So
Collenia is likely to have grown on dolomite

mud banks.

(iii) Collenia forms are marked in section only
by difference in dolomite grain sizes.

(iv) The only definitely transported material

are the detrital quartz grains.

(v) The presence of post depositional baryte
indicates definite saline conditions of deposition

so the dolomite could be primary.

(vi) The occurrence of stylolites shows. that
extensive interstratal solutions existed after

deposition of sediment.

(vii) Copper in the fresh dolomite examined is
most likely present as only specks of chalcopyrite.

[owes

===== page 25 (ocr)
2.3

” - 18 ~~

=
C3
oS
oO
oO
Co

Whyalla Sandstone

2.3.1 Generally, for all areas, the Whyalla

Sandstone is distinct in that :-

(i) Aeolian origin of the larger sand grains
is established as large well rounded grains
are seen.

(ii) The associated grains of (i) are a matrix
of fine angular to rounded silt sized quartz
mineral grains.

(iin) There are frequently large, well rounded
chert grains present.

(iv) Most often but not invariably there is a
greater abundance of soft matrix minerals -
kaolinite plus hematite/limonite rather than
the almost invariable ~ quartz or chert cement

~ o£ the Pandurra Quartzite.

Separate characteristics are noted below.

2.3.2 Main Open Pit
(i) Mainly rounded grains plus finer quartz

matrix with kaolinite but some rounded to
subangular grains in equigranular bands.

(ii) Few quartz rock fragments are seen.

(iad) In the matrix component, kaolinite is
more abundant than chert.

(iv) Moderate amount of matrix.

(v) Lack of heavy minerals.

[owes

===== page 26 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

~

* - 19 - — 000087

2.3.3 West Lagoon
(i) Marked size difference between the large

rounded aeolian grains component and the finer

matrix quartz.

(ii) An abundance of rounded chert grains in
some specimens.

(iii) Few equigranular quartz bands are seen.

(iv) An abundance (approximately 5 volume
percent) of clay or chert replacing clay
_occurs as matrix - rather more than is seen
in Main Open Pit specimens.

2.3.4 Mystery Area
(i) Two specimens show large rounded aeolian

grains with fine matrix as noted in other areas,
the remaining specimen is finer grained and
moderately equigranular.

(ii) Quartz rock fragments are becoming
abundant (to 10 volume percent).

(iii) Fairly fresh microcline grains, only
slightly sericitised.

(iv) Few heavy minerals are present. .

(v) Carbonate clasts or granules are common
in the matrix (Whyalla Sandstone here rests
on Woocaila Dolomite).

[owes

===== page 27 (ocr)
 

 

 

2.4

- ~ 20 -~ 0000828

2.3.5 Plateau Area (SW of Mill)

(i) Rounded quartz grains, rock fragments and
chert grains of aeolian origin but close packed
with minimal matrix.

(ii) The matrix is almost completely silicified
so that only trains of hematite, fluid inclusions
and opaque particles indicate former outlines of
aeolian grains.

(iii) Optical continuity between original quartz
and & quartz 'matrix' is maintained.

(iv) Any original silty quartz matrix grains
have been dissolved and absorbed by growing
quartz aeolian grains.

(v) Kaolinite present is showing intergrowths
of muscovite.

Tregolana Shale

2.4.1 Mystery Area
A fine grained variable quartz, sericite,

hematite, carbonate, kaolinite shale. The vertically
changing mineral distributions delineate banding.

Corrubura Sandstone

2.5.1 Mount Gunson

A great variation in median grain size
between specimens of somewhat different appearance
but most quartz grains are angular to ovoid and
tabular and grains within one hand-specimen are more
or less equigranular. Appreciable limonite/kaolinite
matrix is abundant. Much strained quartz including

Béhm Lamellae is seen. Very few quartz rock fragments

[owes

===== page 28 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

2.6.

nae 990089

are present. Fresh microcline occurs and more than
one percent of heavy minerals including zircon and
tourmaline, also some flakes of detrital muscovite.
Silicification was limited and patchy.

Simmens Quartzite

2.6.1 Mount Gunson

Only two specimens were collected, both
are much silicified and display prominent current
bedding, showing shallow water conditions of
sedimentation and cross-current activity from
disgeorging streams. An absence of soft matrix
minerals (clays, etc) is noted. Conversion of edges
of some quartz grains to chert show post-depositional
unstable pH conditions after sedimentation. This is
distinct from Pandurra Quartzite where the common
occurrence of current bedding and presence of an
appreciably heavy mineral suite is not seen. The
quartz grains are relatively unstrained and this
may indicate a different provenance from the Pandurra
Quartzite. :

Jowes

===== page 29 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ta

. - 22 - 900080

DISCUSSION SUMMARY

3.1 Gunson Area

The rock sequences examined by R.K. Johns
(Ref. 6) consists of Upper Proterozoic (Adelaide System)
Pandurra Quartzite overlain unconfermably by the Tent Hill
Formation of (from bottom upwards) Woocalla Dolomite,
Whyalla Sandstone and Tregolana Shale. Above the
Tregolana Shale occur the Corrubura Sandstone capped
by Simmens Quartzite occurring as the outlier of Mount
Gunson.

‘.The Pandurra Quartzite appears to have consisted
originally of somewhat rounded sand grains as seen by
hematite trains within diagenetiically enlarged more
angular grains, masses of which have been cemented
together by quartz or chert to form large frequently
angular clasts. Poor sorting, a characteristic of
Pandurra Quartzite is significant for a seasonal high

‘energy environment. Chert grains are present in appreciable

numbers but not as much so as in the overlying Whyalla
Sandstone. Kaolinite does form the matrix in places,
where it has not been replaced by chert. The replacement
of kaolinite by chert is of common occurrence in sub-
greywacke sandstones according to Dapples (Ref. 1), the
mechanism of the process not being clear but it is thought
that clay sized interstitial material containing small
particles of quartz, act as nuclei for precipitation of
additional silica. Larger clasts of quartz rock material
and more quartz rather than chert cement at West Lagoon
compared with the Main Open Pit indicate a higher energy
environment during sedimentation and a subsequent reducing
environment rather than oxidizing as is seen at the Main

Open Pit.

Doves

===== page 30 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

“ - 23 - - §O00971

In the Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon area a zone of
red-mud containing roughly 60 volume percent of scattered
large subangular quartz grains indicates an estuarine
locale to a fast moving stream. Remaining sections show
a very poorly sorted sand grain component with a fair
concentration of quartz gneiss grains from a metamorphic
rock source. An abundant matrix of kaolinite (or chert
after kaolinite) and a high quartz rock to mineral grain
ratio indicates an estuarine/shore line deposition of
arrested stream velocity of a fast moving stream hypothesis

“(vide supra).

_In Woocalla Quarry a greater variation in
individual quartz grain size, lack of matrix and of rock
fragments indicates a beach environment above normal wave

action to account for the poor sorting.

Lack of fine matrix is significant with the
lack of sulphides in Woocalla Quarry/Pandurra Quartzite’
suggesting that the sulphides are mainly present where
matrix minerals are abundant as in river estuaries or
channel deposits, precipitated as gels (sulphides or
hydroxides) in the more alkaline saline waters of an
estuary or perhaps washed down as sulphides with clay
minerals from playa lakes finally settling in a zone of
reduced water velocity. Lack of heavy minerals and
occurrence of hematite trains within quartz grains show
that many of the quartz grains have been recycled from a
previous littoral setting.

The overlying Woocalla Dolomite is overstepped
by the Whyalla Sandstone west of a narrow strip of hinter-
land on the west shore of Pernatty Lagoon, is absent in
the Main Open Pit area but is seen to occur in the drill
cores of the Mystery-Pernatty Lagoon '3 - 6' programme.
Here the dolomite is remarkably pure and of a manganiferous
type as determined by Dr. M.T. Barnet. According to Dana

[owns

===== page 31 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 600092

\

™ - 24 -

(Ref. 8) and Deer, Howie and Zussman (Ref. 9), Cu as such

is not accommodated in the dolomite lattice although mn2*,
co2*, Pb and Zn will substitute for Mg (Ref. 8) and Pb will
substitute for Ca in the lattice. No mention of substitution
of Mg or Ca by Cu is made by either sources, so that Cu
present in even small quantities will be there as a discrete
non-dolomite probably sulphide phase. Some fine scattered
specks of chalcopyrite are seen in some shaly beds towards
the bottom of the Woocalla Dolomite at Sweet Nell but these

are of very limited occurrence and are quite different €rom

‘the pure dolomite which constitutes the bulk of the Woocalla .

Dolomite. Weathering of the dolomite, as at Woocalla Quarry
gives a shaly looking black rock but apart from 2 volume
‘percent detrital quartz, impurities consist almost

entirely only of exsolved manganese from the dolomite
erystal. lattice as manganese dioxide. Rankama and Sahama
(Ref. 10) report an average of 12.6 g/ton of Cu in dolomite
which is approximately 13 ppm. Johns, King and Dickinson
(Refs. 11, 12 and 13 respectively), suggest dolomite at

‘Mount Gunson to be the source of copper but in view of

the likely overall small concentration of copper in the’
main dolomite, lateral secretion of the latter by meteoric
waters with secondary deposition in fissures in the
underlying Pandurra Quartzite seems of little importance.

Whyalla Sandstone is discussed in Part I of this
report where the shapes and surfaces of large spherical
frosted grains were studied in deslimed percussion drill
samples. These samples cover a more widespread area than
the diamond drill holes and surface exposed localities.
However differences of size and shape of grains and mineral
content have been observed for specimens from the Main
Open Pit,’ West Lagoon, Mystery and ‘Plateau' areas. The
most distinctive characteristic generally is the two
a@istinct modes of grain size which comprise the bulk of
Whyalla Sandstone exposed or drilled. Large aeolian grains

[aves

===== page 32 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. 25 - - 000098

occur with frosted surfaces to several millimetres in
diameter and sharp angular grains of a few microns
diameter with kaolinite occur in the matrix, which is
generally abundant. It is assumed therefore that the
palaeo-landscape was an arid desert one, consisting of
sand dunes and salt lakes. Periods of flash flooding
overflowed the lakes and the temporary streams so formed
incorporated dune sand particles with lacustrine mud which
together drained in to channels occurring below the water
table as a semisolid mass so that graded bedding did not

‘form. Pyrite which developed from the bacterial reduction

of gypsum and anhydrite in the original playa lakes was
washed into the channels with the mud and dune quartz.
This provided nuclei for replacement by copper solutions
@raining from streams which during infrequent heavy rains
covered a very large part of the catchment area of this

low-relief landscape. Fluctuations of water-table due

to eustatic rise in the water level or isostatic rise of
the shelf or craton caused solution and mobility of the
sulphides and percolation through the sandstone downwards
to produce supergene zones particularly in the underlying
Pandurra Quartzite where mobility was restricted by
secondary quartz or chert, sealing-off the porous structure
of the erstwhile sandstone. Lowering of Eh resulted in
further bacterial reduction of sulphates to produce further

pyrite nuclei for copper sulphide precipitation.

Differences between the various sampled Mount
Gunson area, Whyalla Sandstone occurrences are slight.

The presence in the Main Open Pit of bands of superpose
more equigranular quartz of subangular aspect indicate a eustatic
rise in the water level above the drainage channels contain-
ing washed-out desert dune sand to wash in beach dune or
beach sand (MacCarthy - Ref. i4). ‘The presence of moderate
matrix suggests less mixing with playa lake material, the
waters draining to the flood channels only skirting playa

[ones

===== page 33 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“ - 26 - 000094

lakes. The gross oxidation of exposed deposits suggests
a higher water table existed when the copper deposits
formed than occurs today or possibly uplift of the area
may have occurred.

The West Lagoon orebody occurs on the shores of
Pernatty Lagoon and it being roughly level with the
present water-table is undergoing supergene sulphide
enrichment from percolating cupriferous waters. The
lower situation of West Lagoon as compared with the Main
Open Pit equates with a greater clay matrix component
washed-in from previously existing playa lakes (cf.
Pandurra Quartgite, Mystery Area). A somewhat different
provenance is shown by the abundance of near spherical
chert grains (of desert dune origin ?).

Mystery area Whyalla Sandstone contains large
and small clasts of carbonate originating from ‘underiying'
eroded Woocalla Dolomite and also an abundance of rounded
quartz rock fragments indicating that sand dunes of varying

‘quartz lithologies provided material for these deposits

and that periodical flooding was extensive and covered a
wide area. The presence of microcline feldspar further
confirmed the normally arid climate which prevailed over
the catchment area.

The Plateau area south-west of the Mill Site
is of rather high elevation comparatively speaking and
here silicification of the sandstone has been most complete
because of the paucity of original 'kaolinite' matrix.
The sandstone consists for the main of tightly packed
spherical sand grains of frosted surface, of aeolian
origin and with occasional kaolinite pseudomorphs of
original microcline. Some of the kaolinite is developing
into muscovite which indicates an increase in pH (5.5 to
7.5) and slight increase to a positive Eh, Dapples (Ref.
1), a change which has taken place since kaolinisation of

[oeee

===== page 34 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

a - 27-7 990095

feldspars and probably due to a fall in the water-table
to the present day. ‘ Incorporation of playa lake mud was
negligible and concurrent absence of sulphides is

significant.

3.2 A Comparison with Other Red Bed Copper Mineralised Areas

/ A present day example of sulphides accumulating
under continental conditions on the east African coast is
cited by Garlick (Ref. 15), where tropical lagoons behind a
protecting coral barrier reef are bottomed by appreciable
organic material which at low tide give off a smell of Hs
and the muds are seen to contain mud-fine iron sulphide.
Stagnant pools are dammed by sand dunes. Johns (Ref. 6)
makes an allusion to the Gunson sedimentation environment
which is similar to that cited in east Africa except for
the existence of Collenia reefs rather than coral reefs.

Garlick (Ref. 15) showed how the Nile delta
received 51 x 10® metric tons of suspended solids and
21 x 10° tons of salts annually. Assuming 100 ppm of Cu
as an average figure for the sediments and igneov's rocks
in the Nile drainage area, 7,200 tons of Cu would be
carried annually to the sea. So that after 1,000 years
of erosion a 7 x 10° ton copper deposit might result.
However Garlick pointed out that to ensure the
concentration of an orebody it was necessary for there
to exist,
(a) a means of efficient and selective precipitation of
copper from weak solutions and
(b) a method of keeping much of the 51 x 10° tons of
detritus away from the precipitation area.
Garlick goes on to say that the precipitation process can
occur in stagnant sea bottoms where HS is generated in
large volumes and will precipitate most or all of the
copper before iron is precipitated in major quantity.

Lawes

===== page 35 (ocr)
* - 28 - 000096

Garlick (Ref. 16) states that the literature on
stratiform disseminated sulphide deposits in arenaceous
sediments is somewhat meagre. He discusses the arenaceous
mineralised horizons at Mufulira and states that arenites
are not typically deposited under anaerobic conditions
since cross-bedded arenites demand fast flowing water
which is usually oxygenated, deposited rapidly and remains
permeable for long periods after burial. This observation
indicates that the mineralisation at Gunson would therefore
have had to be flushed in as sulphides or sulphide gels
from a lake bed where anoxic conditions prevailed and/or
deposited on suitable nuclei within the sandstone matrix

 

 

after sedimentation in drainage channels adjoining the
water-table. However in other ways there are broad similarities
between the Mount Gunson and Mulfulira mineralisation

 

environments, with the presence of :-

 

(a) feldspar or pseudomorphs after feldspar in the
sandstone/quartzite,

(b) a supposed mainly arid climate,

(c) sulphidite layers,

(a) load casts,

(e) anhydrite concretions,

 

in the sandstone,

 

(£) barren aeolian arenites and mineralised aqueous

arenites, and

 

(g) algal growths in neighbouring dolomite.
Differences between the environments are shown by the
following characteristics at Gunson :-

 

(a) absence of mineralised argillite horizons, *
(b) absence of cross—bedding
(c) silicification of much of the Pandurra Quartzite,

 

(a) narrowness of mineralised horizons and their
horizontal discontinuity, their being centred at
largely past and present water-table levels,

(e) present day slow formation of sulphides in salt lakes,

(£) absence of metamorphism and tectonic structures to

 

 

mobilise ore.

 

[aves

===== page 36 (ocr)
te

 

 

 

 

ape 980097

Garlick prefers to support diagenetic mineralisation
(as distinct from syngenesis within neighbouring argillites)
in the arenite sequence because of the porous nature of
these beds (at Mufulira). He states that it is possible
that contemporaneous diffusion of mineralising solutions
through permeable sand beds may have taken place en route
to the basin where the major proportion of metals was
precipitated syngenetically. Much of the mineralisation
at Gunson would bear a diagenetic interpretation. Garlick
again states that the source of sulphur was biogenic (from
sulphates) and source of metals the erosion of an extensive
land surface as has been suggested for Gunson.

Brandt (Ref. 17) suggests that a parallel may
be drawn between the Mufulira deposit as interpreted by
himself and also White Pine, Michigan as interpreted by
White and Wright (Ref. 19) where the copper is syngenetic
derived from waters in which the associated sediments were
laid down and precipitated in stagnant lagoons enclosed

‘by levies and sand bars in a delta topography. Copper

bearing siltstones were deposited in lagoons between
separate distributory streams and the mineralisation being
terminated by inundation of the bars and levies and
filling-up of the lagoons with barren sediment. The
parallel with Mufulira is very close and resemblances

to Gunson are noted. Brandt goes on to quote Stanton
(Ref. 20) who, discussing numerous North American sulphide

‘deposits in the Appalachian belt in sedimentary-volcanic

terrains, described them as biochemical precipitates formed
in shallow-water offshore lagoons in seaboard volcanic
areas, fumarolic activity being necessary to supply metals
and sulphur to sea water, Stanton did not consider that
metals in solution could have been supplied in sufficient
concentrations by erosion processes only. However a ready-—
made volcanic source for copper and sulphur does not exist
in the Zambian Copperbelt, White Pine or in the Gunson

area. In the absence of any evidence for volcanic or

[wens

===== page 37 (ocr)
 

2 80 - . 999098

fumarolic activity it must be assumed that the metals,
if syngenetic, were derived originally from basement
rocks by erosion. Even though geological opinion is
generally unfavourable to the idea of erosion being
competent to supply large amounts of metal the
probability of this occurring is examined by Garlick
(Ref. 16) as cited above, and discussed by Gilmour (Ref.
21) who describes several present day examples of copper
yielded by the weathering of pyritic orebodies, being
carried in solution by streams and precipitated in bogs

‘fed by streams. Present day organic sequestration of

copper being concentrated in peat bogs is discussed by
Fraser (Ref. 22), where concentration of up to 10. percent
copper is reported in south-eastern New Brunswick, Canada.
The copper is leached from country rock (boulder clay ?)
and emerges as seepages in clearings in the bog.

A similar geology and palaeogeography to that
of Mount Gunson has been described for the Lower Roan
Formation at Chibuluma on the Zambian Copperbelt by
Whyte and Green (Ref. 18). The mineralisation here is
in aqueous micaceous arenite. The presence of a great
deal of pyrite and carrollite at Chibuluma suggests
precipitation of part of the sulphides in a neutral or
alkaline environment whereas copper, bismuth and silver
at Gunson were precipitated from acid waters and the
climate was possibly seasonally less arid. Palaeogeography
indicates a river channel most likely cutting into thick
aeolian sediments prior to a marine transgression and then
submerged. The channel was present but submerged through-
out deposition of quartzitic arenites of the ore horizon
and shallowing of the water from time to time exposed a
sand bank. Facies complications which occurred in the
channel were due in large part to scouring and mixing of
sediment by current activity in a southern extension of
the submerged channel. An alternative suggestion by Green

[aces

===== page 38 (ocr)
 

. - 31 -— 9900099

for the origin of the oreshoot was deposition in a playa
lake, in which case the proposed marine transgression did
not take place until after the close of ore deposition.

It was suggested that the basin was periodically unindated
with flash flood waters carrying Cu, Fe and Co leached

from the surrounding country. The metals were probably
deposited as sulphides under anaerobic conditions with
gradual evaporation of water in the basin but incomplete
drying out to account for facies changes, scour channels
and stratification of copper, cobalt and iron (pyrite)
facies. Lack of evidence of sun-cracks suggests the lake
never completely dried out. Other interesting observations
made were that the high grade mineralisation is confined

to the hard compact quartzite arenite; also that syngenetic
deposition in the orebody could have taken place as -

(a) chemical precipitation as hydroxide,

(b) chemical precipitation as sulphide, or

(c) detrital deposition of metalliferous minerals.

The geology, palaeogeography and interpretation of the
unrolled plan of geology, bearing in mind that the Chibuluma
West Orebody was metamorphosed, folded and faulted is very
similar to that of Mount Gunson. However as in ail the
previous examples of sulphides developing in arenite,

there always appear to be neighbouring mineralised
argillaceous rocks which provided the syngenetic aspect

of sulphide development. These mineralised argillites

do not exist at Gunson to supply mineralisation for the
orebodies which are mainly at the Whyalla sandstone/

Pandurra Quartzite contact.

The various copper deposits of the European Upper
Permiah Zechstein Sea (Oberc, J. and Serkies, J. - Ref. 2)
show biogenic syngenetic development in a reducing medium
of sea water and silts containing organic matter (ex
plankton) which produced the mineralised bituminous
Kupferschiefer with associated underlying sandstones which

also contain ore.

[eves

===== page 39 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

“= 32 = - 900100

To account for copper in porous sandstones,
post-depositional processes were suggested to have taken
place on a large scale. Because of the paucity of copper
in sea-water, weathering of pre-existing endogenic deposits
in the surrounding land areas and circulating ground waters
in underlying Lower Permian sandy sediments were involved,
to supplement the copper already dissolved in sea-water.

A direct ratio was established between copper and organic
carbon present in the Kupferschiefer and topmost White
Zechstein sandstone, the carbon being derived from dead

plankton; lead and zinc occurs in the upper part of the

deposits. One interesting observation which bears
comparison with Gunson are the occurrence of maximum
concentrations of copper in a very limited vertical
section of the upper White Zechstein sandstone and
overlying copper shales and this is purported as evidence
of a very rapid supply of large quantities of copper to
the Zechstein Basin and rapid precipitation of that copper
during the relatively short period of sedimentation of
copper-bearing sediments directly after transgression

of the sea. Zechstein deposits were considerably
enriched in sulphates and these were reduced to supply
sulphur for sulphide production. No mention of sulphur
reducing bacteria is made. Adsorption of Cu ions on
sinking particulate matter in the sea was thought to be
the mechanism for bringing the copper to the reducing
zone. Sulphide bodies were formed by diagenetic
differentiation of the more soluble sulphides from
lithifying bottom sediments. Decrease of pH during
diagenesis favoured changes in trace element mineralogy
so that bismuthinite and native silver were precipitated.
Possibly similar conditions existed for the occurrence
of silver and bismuth sulpho-salts at Gunson. The White
zechstein sandstone as mentioned above is in places
impregnated with copper, mainly as chalcocite with some
chalcopyrite (as for Gunson ~ Pandurra Quartzite/Wwhyalla

[oeee

===== page 40 (ocr)
 

000101

- 33 -

Sandstone contact). The essentially oxidizing. sedimentation
medium of the White Zechstein Sandstone as compared with
the nature of mineralisation found in it is evidence that
the metallic minerals were emplaced by later downward
percolation of sulphide solutions in part resulting from
diagenetic differentiation in the overlying copper bearing
shales (Kupferschiefer) and the copper in the sandstone is
therefore epigenetic. Decolorisation of this sandstone
extends to greater depth than does the sulphide
impregnation (see West Lagoon, 44004, Whyalla Sandstone,
Ref. 2). Supergene enrichment in joints and fissures are
regarded as post-diagenetic by weakly oxidizing secondary
solutions circulating the deposit, (the similar processes
at Mount Gunson are described as diagenetic since it is
difficult to distinguish these processes from diagenetic
changes occurring within the Whyalla Sandstone or Pandurra

Quartzite.

Other worldwide areas of metalliferous mineralisation
of arenites are rare and Garlick (Ref. 15) mentions only
two, other than the Zambian Copperbelt occurrences (Brown -
Ref. 24 and Grip - Ref. 25). ‘

Above the Whyalla Sandstone of the Tent Hill
Formation of Gunson rests the relatively thin Tregolana
Shale (<50 feet in the Gunson area : Johns - Ref. 6) and
unlike its equivalent, the Kupferschiefer of the German
zechstein sequence (Gignoux - Ref. 26), it is largely
non-cupriferous and is not bituminous. Lack of bitumen
iis equitable with lack of abundant life forms in Upper
Proterozoic times. Tregolana Shale consists of very
variable concentrations of fine sedimented quartz,
sericite, dolomite and kaolinite with variable concentrations
of hematite particle inclusions giving a banded appearance
to the rock.

[eves

===== page 41 (ocr)
 

-34-> g00102

Above the Tregolana Shale, the Corruburra Sandstone
and Simmens Quartzite occur in the area as an outlier -
Mount Gunson, which rises mesa-like above the gently
undulating plateau/salt lake topography.

The Corruburra Sandstone bears some resemblance

_ to the Whyalla Sandstone below, but the larger quartz

grains are ovoid to rounded-tabular in shape and have all
the appearance of being water worn. The grain size is

very variable at different horizons but equigranular

along bedding planes. The rock is feldspathic containing
detrital fresh microcline and unlike the arenaceous deposits
below, it contains an appreciable heavy mineral content.

The rock is somewhat similar to the Feldspathic Quartzite
(occasionally mineralised) of the Zambian Copperbelt and

similarly is above the main ore horizon.

The overlying Simmens Quartzite is somewhat
coarser grained than the Corruburra Sandstone, and almost
completely silicified. The feldspar content is quite high
at 4 percent in the specimen examined and heavy mineral
content at 2 percent is high for 'sandstone' rock types»
in the Gunson area. Current bedding is very marked

showing shallow water deposition.

The climate in both Corruburra Sandstone and
Simmens Quartzite times remained arid. The deposits are
shallow water shelf/estuarine, which lay dormant during
lengthy arid spells punctuated by sporadic flash
flooding of rivers. Similar to the conditions applying
today, in fact. A relative abundance of heavy minerals
and fresh feldspar indicates a source of rock material
which has not suffered as much recycling and mineral
differentiation as the underlying sandstones.

[vous

===== page 42 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

” -35-7 : 0001038

3.3 Fluid Inclusions

Fluid inclusions are abundant in quartz over-
growths and planes of weakness in mineral grains mainly,
but also patchily in rock fragments and chert grains.
Unfortunately only once was a halite crystal seen in an
inclusion to prove the salinity of the contained solution.
However, it is assumed that apart from a few primary
inclusions present in primary quartz grains before
diagenesis, most of the inclusions’ contain the brine
which transported metal values resulting in the present
copper deposits. It is seen that the inclusions were
trapped during silicification by the silica-rich brine
solutions. No fluid inclusions could be seen in the
sulphides (these are difficult to see in opaque ores),
although scattered fluid inclusions are seen in the
malachite of the Pandurra Quartgite of the Main Open Pit.
Penetration along fissures and grain boundaries by the
brine is seen in stressed, grains and in adjoining mineral
grain boundaries in rock fragments. Fluid inclusions in
chert fragments were presumably formed during crystallisation
of the chert in some previous epoch. , ,

The dearth of fluid inclusions in the Woocalla
Dolomite indicates its formation by primary deposition
and slow compaction during sedimentation with little or
no circulation of brine after compaction.

It was stated by Roedder (Ref. 27) that fluid
inclusions in most cases do not lose or gain appreciable
quantities of material after being trapped. Therefore
for the purpose of interpretation of ore genesis some
idea of the composition of the original ore forming fluid
could be obtained by using methods such as Roedder E,
Ingram B, et al (Ref. 28). Determination of filling
temperature should also be done, to prove the low
temperature of the brine at the time it was trapped in the

void.

[vere

===== page 43 (ocr)
 

‘ DESCRIPTIONS OF SECTIONS

. - 36 - - 000104

4.1 Pandurra Quartzite/Main Open Cut

A 4252 (D.H. 3-4-1D, 21.9m)

Bands of alternating fine and coarse quarts
grains. The bands vary between rounded and subangular,
poorly sorted grains and well sorted bands of larger
rounded grains. The quartz mineral grains vary between

0.15 and 2.1 mm with the average varying between .25 and

1 mm within different bands. Most quartz rock fragments
are close to 2.5 mm diameter and a few of these are
gneissose in appearance. Unusually, rock fragments are
composed of equigranular mosaics of quartz mineral grains,
the individual grain sizes being close to 0.05 mm. A
minor proportion of quartz grains are fused together end
a narrow quartz selvage occurs at the mutual boundary.
Trains of hematite particles and fluid inclusions
(approximately 144) occur just outside primary quartz
grain boundaries indicate a more rounded original grain.
Abundant kaolinite (locally modified to sericite) plus ,
hematite which was present intestitially has now been
replaced by quartz or by chert. As a proportion of
matrix kaolinite is equally abundant in fine and coarse
quartz bands but chert is less frequently seen in the
finer bands. In the coarse bands the kaolinite is seen
mainly in vugs of probably decomposed feldspar of variable
size and up to 1 mm dimensions. Grains of chert to 0.5 mm
are seen in association with the kaolinite and may be an
example of chert replacing clay (Ref. 1).

Mineral modal volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 87
quartz rock fragments

chert 2
kaolinite (locally modified to sericite)

hematite . <i
sulphides (chalcocite and chalcopyrite) 1

===== page 44 (ocr)
oe

 

 

* - 37 -~ 800105

A 4254 (D.H. 3-4-2D, 18.0m)

Similar to A 4252 in grain sizes, distribution of
minerals and poor sorting of mainly finer ‘sizes. One band
of larger grains, including quartz mineral, quartz rock
and chert show a number of fairly well rounded grains
but mainly angular to subangular grains and much kaolinite
(altering to sericite) matrix. Quartz mineral grains vary
between .05 and 1.2 mm; and rock fragments vary up .to 3.5mm;
chert grains vary between 0.7 and 1.3 mm. Complex suturing
occurs at boundaries between quartz grains in some quartz
rock fragments. Diagenetic alteration of matrix (clay to
quartz) is patchy. Scattered hematite flakes occur in
clay and chert in the matrix. Occasional large (.10 to
-20 mm) worn detrital zircon and some messy sphene are

seen.
Modal volume percent of mineral composition :-

quartz mineral 87
quartz rock 5
chert fragments 1
chert matrix , » 2
kaolinite (altering to sericite) 5
zircon and sphene <1
hematite <1

A 4256 (D.H. 3-4-3D, 8.5m)

Poorly but still better sorted than A 4252, 4254,
with fine and coarse bands and diagenesis has resulted in
the replacement of much of the clay matrix by quartz
addition to quartz (mineral grains and rock fragments).

A little orthorhombic chalcocite (shows 001 cleavage),
altering along cleavages to atacamite. Elsewhere fine
fractures (<.1 mm) traverse quartz grain boundaries,
parallel to bedding and are filled with malachite and
atacamite. This is an oxidation effect and probably
has something to do with the greater volume occupied

faces

===== page 45 (ocr)
 

 

 

~ 38 - - 00106

by the oxide mineral which has replaced the pre-existing

copper sulphide.

Occasional round’ zircons (approximately .05 mm)
are seen in the interstices and some small amber coloured

rutile prisms.

Judging by the mutual replacement of atacamite
by secondary quartz and vice versa it would appear that
diagenesis has continued alongside oxidation of the
sulphide minerals. Some fractures across quartz grains

‘are part filled with atacamite intergrown with

secondary quartz.

Strain is shown by only a minority of quartz
grains and these apparently do not occur in zones adjoining
mineralisation (7). Diagenesis by silica solution has
been extensive but chert has not precipitated. Very little
clay mineral remains in the interstices. Hematite trains
and fluid inclusions adjoining primary quartz grains :
indicate the extent of quartz grain growth, the quartz
grains being originally more rounded as a rule. Joins
between quartz grains show simple suturing or somewhat
sinuous bands of secondary quartz a few microns only in
width.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-

quartz mineral grains 98
quartz rock fragments . 2
chert <i
kaolinite : <i
zircon | , Zi

Quartz mineral grains average 0.5 mm; vary from 0.05 to
2.1 mm. Quartz rock fragments are variable in size to

3 mm.

Joeee

===== page 46 (ocr)
800107

. - 39 -

A 4257 (D.H. 3-4-3D, 14.0m)

Similar to previous sections in this series,
coarse more equigranular bands showing some rounded grains
and finer bands with a proportion of much larger
subangular ‘erratics'. , ,

A minimum of matrix is seen between the quartz
grains which show sinuous bands of secondary quartz
between grains, a few microns wide. Original grain
boundaries are demarcated by hematite particle and
‘fluid inclusion traces. Optical continuity is exhibited
by the secondary growths away from the contacts. Some
residual kaolinite remains in pockets (ex-feldspar ?)
but some remains unreplaced in channel ways between the
grains. Little or no chert replacement of clay is seen.
Some large round chert grains occur and quartz gneiss
fragments are uncommon. Tabular quartz mineral grains
with rounded edges (water-worn) average 0.24 mm, vary
from 0.05 to 0.80 mm; quartz rock fragment are usually
large and vary up to 0.80 mm.

The kaolinite is occasionally brownish and
shows a higher than normal birefringence; it is possibly
altering to brownish sericite.

Modal mineral composition of the rock :-

quartz mineral grains 96
quartz rock fragments . 2
chert <i
clay : 2
hematite ‘ <1
gircon <1

, All four Pandurra Quartzite specimens are very
similar, the variations amounting to differential diagenesis
by silica containing solutions. Replacement of kaolinite
by chert is the predominant change rather than secondary

[avee

===== page 47 (ocr)
800108

-.40 -

quartz growth on to primary grains. This is discussed by
Dapples (Ref. 1) who suggests that ‘clay mineral aggregates
may be completely replaced’ by chert. More stable quartz
may be precipitated on primary quartz grains as overgrowths
and fillings of interstitial space .... precipitated when
the silica content of the water in the sandstone aquifer

is no more than several parts per million and the pH is

+ 7 with a general prevalence of oxidising conditions.

For these conditions to prevail the possibility of
sulphides forming con-currently with the process of silica

‘diagenesis is not possible and therefore the latter post-

dated the sulphide mineralisation.
4.2 Main Open Pit : Specimens Collected - July 1971 (Ref. 2)

A 4012, 4013 (Specimens removed from walls of the
excavated Open Pit)

The quartzite samples are similar to those
taken later from drill holes except that in the ‘pit'
samples the finer bands which are equigranular contain
no large quartz clasts. However as in the drill hole
specimens the large grains in coarse bands vary from
rounded to subangular in shape. Matrix of the rock is
chert in most unmineralised rock, though examples of
quartz growth followed by complex suturing (indicating
pressure solution) between the grains is seen. In the
mineralised specimens chrysocolla is the main matrix
mineral and it is apparently being replaced by malachite
and atacamite which are also replacing quartz grains in
part or in whole. Chert/chalcedony growths have worked
their way along secondary quartz margins where quartz
grains were previously cemented by secondary c& -quartz.

[oaee

===== page 48 (ocr)
5 - 4b £00109

4.3 West Lagoon : Specimens Collected - July 1971 (Ref. 2)

' A 4002, 4005, 4009 and 4010
Similar to Main Open Pit drill hole specimens,

with alternating fine equigranular bands containing
scattered large clasts of quartz rock and coarse bands of
quartz subangular to somewhat rounded grains with abundant
matrix of clay mineral. However much of the quartz consists
of quartz mosaics with slight suturing or a sinuous
secondary quartz ‘join' between individual quartz grains.

No chert is seen.

The precipitation of chert was therefore related
to alkaline, oxidation conditions and bearing in mind that
these West Lagoon rocks contain only sulphides, secondary
quartz (as distinct from chert) deposition was due to
deposition from slightly acid solution and slightly
negative Eh.

4.4 Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon Area

A 4238 (D.H. 3-6-1D, 29.4m)

In hand specimens the rock consists of large
round and angular grains of quartz with abundant red-brown
tough matrix of somewhat greywacke appearance.

Quite different from other specimens of Pandurra
Quartzite examined, the matrix is seen to consist of fine
angular quartz fragments averaging around 0.05 mm, varying
between 0.016 and 0.11 mm; hematite flakes (average 0.030
mm); and fine chert. Hematite flakes form narrow zones
around larger quartz rock fragments or as laths
(approximately .08 mm) otherwise intermixed with the

cherty substance.

The large grains of quartz are angular, show much

irregular cracking and are strained; they average 0.32 mn

[ovee

===== page 49 (ocr)
 

. - 42 - 900110

but vary up to 0.80 mm. Large chert grains, rounded to
angular and of similar grain size to large quartz rock
fragments occur, up to several mm's in size.

A structure originally thought to be foraminiferal,
(four joined rounded chambers, 0.5 mm diameter) with a
thin cherty test and filled with fine chert, is present.
Dr. D. Burger, Micropalaontologist, of the Bureau of
Mineral Resources has looked at this and though he cannot
explain the existence of the structure he thinks it may

not be of organic origin.

Modal composition, volume percent :--

quartz mineral 10
quartz rock , 48
chert - matrix 30
chert - grains 3
kaolinite matrix 2
kaolinised feldspars 2
hematite 3
2°

opaque minerals

A 4241 (D.H. 3-6-2D, 43.6m)

A poorly sorted quartzite, grain sizes not very
different but perhaps somewhat coarser than previous
specimens observed from the Main Open Pit. Banding by
finer grained quartz is not evident.

The quartz grains are mainly subangular but
mineral grains and rock fragment of rounded aspect are
seen and occasional angular quartz rock fragments. The
quartz mineral grains average 0.64 mm, vary between 0.08
to 1.1 mms; quartz rock fragments generally vary between
0.80 mm to 2.3 mms. A small number of angular raft-like

grains of sheared quartz gneiss are seen.

[eves

===== page 50 (ocr)
 

goo111

- 43 ->

The matrix of kaolinite altering to sericite
{or illite ?) is abundant. Alteration to sericite appears
to take place mainly where the matrix adjoins large quartz
grains but sometimes also within the clay matrix,sericite
forms concertina book forms of some size. Hematite flakes
patchily coat quartz fragments. Worn detrital zircon
grains occur in the matrix from 0.016 to 0.080 mm's.

Modal mineral composition, volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 27
quartz rock fragments 60
kaolinite 10
sericite 2
hematite 1
zircon <1

A 4245 (D.H. 3-6-3D, 58.1m)

A poorly sorted quartzite and similar to A 4241
except for the higher proportion of quartz rock fragments
in the latter and for replacement of kaolinite matrix by
chert. The quartz grains are mainly subangular but with
a high proportion (approximately 20 percent) of angular
grains and a few rounded quartz grains of intermediate
size. The size ranges are - quartz mineral grains 0.2 to
3 mm, average 0.5 mm; quartz rock fragments 0.5 to 1.5 mm.
Much of the original kaolinite has been replaced by
interstitial chert. Large spaces between the quartz grains
are filled with chert and clay; quartz grains have patchily
become welded together by narrow sinuous joins of secondary
quartz. Many quartz mineral grains appear to be finely
and irregularly cracked, but strain is not well marked
and many grains show no strain characteristics. Heavy
minerals are absent. Scattered vermicules (vermiculite
or other clay mineral - to 0.48'mn long 'book' forms occur
in the matrix, some have interleaved hematite - possibly

altered biotite.

[owes

===== page 51 (ocr)
. 44 - 000112

A proportion of chert grains contain opaque
matter, mainly angular grains (approximately 0.5 mm, to ~-
0.8 mm).

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-
quartz mineral grains 78
quartz rock fragments ‘
chert grains
chert matrix
kaolinite
hematite

PoP @ODY WwW

vermiculite (?) <

A 4250 (D.H. 3-6-4D, 48.6m)

Similar to A 4241 and'4245; poorly sorted mainly
angular to subangular quartz mineral grains and rock
fragments with occasional large rounded grains, unbanded
and abundant matrix. However much of the matrix in this
rock as in A 4245 is cherty it having replaced original

‘kaolinite. Quartz mineral grains and rock fragments vary

over a similar size range, between 0.1 and 1.5 mm, average
0.6 mm, except for scattered large quartz rock clasts,
around 3 mm. Fine chert has partially replaced coarse
quartz grains around edges but many of these grains are
welded together by a thin sinuous layer of secondary
quartz. Chertification would appear to post date
secondary quartz cementation. Fine particle hematite,
speckles primary chert grains and secondary chert matrix.

Subangular chert grains (approximately 0.7 mm)
are scattered around the section.

_ Occasional interstitial subhedral chalcopyrite
to 0.24 mm maximum size. No other heavy minerals are

present.

[aves

===== page 52 (ocr)
 

000113

” - 45 -

- Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 64
quartz rock fragments 10
chert grains : 3
chert matrix 17

kaolinite/sericite
hematite 2
chalcopyrite

4.5 Woocalla Quarry

Specimens collected from the quarry have variable
angular, subangular and rounded quartz grains, some of this
variability being due to secondary silicification during
diagenesis. Some specimens show fine grain bands; others
are cherty ~ fine and coarse grained types. They have
been subdivided as follows :-

4.5.1 Fine grained, cherty, subangular to
angular grains, banded (according to grain size).
Some large quartz clasts. A 4225.

4.5.2 Fine grained, cherty, subangular to

rounded grains. A 4227.

“4.5.3 Fine grained, cherty, subangular to
angular grains. A 4228.

4.5.4 Coarse to fine grained, very cherty,
unsized subangular to rounded grains. A 4226.

4.5.5 Coarse to fine grained, slightly cherty,
unsized subangular to rounded grains. A 4229, 4230
4232.

[vere

===== page 53 (ocr)
- a | 000114

A 4225

More or less equigranular, subangular to angular
grains for different bedding horizons with sharp cut-off
between bands, except for occasional large subangular
quartz erratics. Growth of the quartz grains is indicated
by trains of hematite particles and fluid inclusions (1-2 44)
adjoining the primary grain boundaries which generally show
the pre-diagenetic grains to have been more rounded. Quartz
growth is in optical continuity with the primary nuclei.
About two percent of quartz grains exhibit strain.
Extensive patches of quartz mosaic occur where secondary
silicification has fused quartz mineral and rock fragments
together with sutured contacts. Average grain size for
different bands is 0.16, 0.32 and 0.64 mms; range 0.1 to
2mm. Erratic clasts vary to 2 mms. Rock fragments
comprise much of the larger grain sizes. Pockets of fine
chert which occur patchily have replaced original kaolinite
but leaving intermixed hematite flakes intact. Occasional
muscovite flakes, up to 0.3 mm are seen in the matrix where
chert has not yet replaced the softer matter. A little
detrital tourmaline and zircon is seen embedded in

diagenetic quartz.

The Liesegang Rings as seen in hand specimen
are indicated in thin-section by rhythmic precipitation
of fine hematite flakes in the matrix uncontrolled by
"bedding' planes and occur where exists a greater hematite:

chert ratio.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-

quartz mineral grains 92
quartz rock fragments 2
chert matrix

hematite matrix , 3
tourmaline, zircon, muscovite, opaques <1

Lovee

===== page 54 (ocr)
 

: NOO1L15

~ - 47 _

A 4227

subangular to rounded quartz mineral grains and
some quartz gneiss rock fragments, range 0.05 to 0.72 mm,
average 0.40 mm. A proportion (approximately 3 volume
percent of grains) are flattened with rounded ends.
Occasional grains contain fine rutile needles in a rough
trigonal pattern. Most of the quartz was originally
welded by secondary quartz in a mosaic with straight or
only slightly curved grain boundaries. However in
remaining interstitial pockets, chert developed (having
replaced residual kaolinite ?); and chert has since partly
replaced grains of quartz growing in remaining channels in
the quartzite. The commonly seen narrow trains of hematite
particles and fluid inclusions adjoin primary quartz grain
boundaries indicating the extent of secondary addition of
quartz. Pressure-solution boundaries between the quartz
grains are seen in A 4226 for example, are not so obvious
here. However more than 50 percent of the quartz grains
show stress and the grains displaying this are usually
mosaics of grains in the section which impinge one on
another. : ,

Pockets of chert after kaolinite, occur between
the quartz grains from 0.24 to 1 mm diameter. Occasional
pockets of kaolinite as 'books' of minute flakes remain.

Quartz rock fragments tend to be more angular
than quartz mineral grains of similar size. ~

Occasional flakes of muscovite are seen; one
is seen to be embedded in secondary quartz (.08 x .03 mm).

One small area of anhedral carbonate
(approximately 0.06 mm square) is seen in the interstices
associated with hematite flakes.

No heavy minerals are seen.

Jove

===== page 55 (ocr)
* _ 48 - P00116

Modal volume percent of mineral constituents :-

‘quartz mineral grains 91
quartz rock fragments : 2
chert grains : 2
chert, interstitial 3
hematite : 2
kaolinite <1
carbonate <1
muscovite <1
A 4228

Fine grained, somewhat cherty subangular to
angular mineral grains of quartz and rock fragments
(some gneiss), varying between 0.05 and 1.5 mm, average
0.24 mm. Welding of the mineral grains together by
precipitation of quartz from percolating silica solutions
has taken place. Some interstitial kaolinite occurring in
channels up to 0.24 mm in width has not as yet been

replaced by chert but primary chert fragments

are in evidence. Hematite flakes are in abundance with
kaolinite where present. In this specimen hematite is ‘
largely adhering to the surfaces of individual quartz
grains so that secondary growth on the quartz grains
was limited. Where grains have fused together to form
mosaics the hematite flakes are seen to be just inside
the new grain boundaries. As before strain shadows in
quartz grains are most noticeable where impection of
grains one on another is greatest. Chert grains are
normally somewhat rounded and vary between 0.1 and 0.2
mm's, they are here mainly free of hematite inclusions.
Some chert is seen to be replacing clay mineral in the
interstices and this frequently engulfs flakes of
hematite.

No heavy minerals are seen.

faves

===== page 56 (ocr)
 

_ 800117

” - 49 -

Hematite banding here follows bedding and does
not indicate Liesegang Rings showing that the latter is
strictly a diagenetic phenomenon.

Modal analysis mineral composition as volume

. percent :-
quartz mineral grains : 84
quartz rock fragments | 5
chert grains 1
chert matrix . <1
-kaolinite
hematite 4
A 4226

A coarse grained rock of subangular to rounded
quartz grains 0.10 to 1.6 mm, average .64 mm and similar
sized angular quartz rock gneiss fragments, occurring
mainly as fused mosaics of quartz with simple straight
or slightly curved grain boundaries. Secondary quartz
occupying original channel-ways is indicated by trains
of hematite particles and fluid inclusions (1-2/+)
demarcating a normally more rounded primary grain nucleus
in optical continuity with the secondary quartz exterior.
Chert grains, subangular, average 0.30 mm are clear of _
opaque matter. Chert also occupies spaces between
quartz grains and is intergrown with and encroaching on
the quartz. Rare muscovite flakes are seen trapped in
secondary quartz. Traces of carbonate are trapped between
interstitial chert and quartz grains and form part of the

matrix.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-
quartz mineral grains 93
quartz rock fragments 3
chert grains 1
chert matrix 2
carbonate matrix : , <L1
muscovite , 1

A well silicified Pandurra Quartzite. : Lovee

===== page 57 (ocr)
 

7 = 80 - 900118

“A 4229

Individual grains of quartz which were more
rounded before diagenesis as indicated by included hematite
trains, range 0.04 to 1.2 mm, average 0.40 mm,many grains
somewhat flattened and oriented to bedding. Sporadic
strained quartz grains with a 2V ~ 15°, Angular quartz
grains to 1 mm, rounded chert grains up to 1 mn.
Interstices where not filled with secondary quartz
contain very little interstitial chert and only traces
of opaque matter. One large quartz erratic present,
subangular, 5 mmx 3 mm. A little muscovite and zircon

are present.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-

quartz mineral grains 91

quartz rock fragments 7

chert grains 1

chert matrix <1

muscovite, hematite, zircon <1
A_ 4230

Similar to A 4299 except for generally larger
quartz rock fragments (to 1.6 mm). Quartz mineral grains
range from 0.10 to 1.03 mm,average 0.5 mm and many are
flattened along bedding planes. Only the matrix is
appreciably cherty and traces of muscovite occur.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :~-
quartz mineral grains : 94
quartz rock fragments 2
chert grains
chert matrix
muscovite q
hematite ,

Hematite may be secondary after sulphides but

is ‘primary' in the matrix and in chert.

[owes

===== page 58 (ocr)
 

* _ 51 -~ 260119

A_4232

Similar to A 4229 and 4230 except for larger
grain size, more rounding of grains, a greater proportion
of quartz greiss rock fragments and the presence of some

heavy minerals. Quartz varies from 0.08 to 2.5 mm

(including rock fragments), average size 0.5 mm.

Completely silicified by secondary quartz growths and

some chert segregated in remaining areas between corners
of grains. Large grains show strain shadows. Chert grains
vary to 0.80 mm, are angular. Scattered detrital zircon
and tourmaline are now embedded in secondary quartz.

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-~

quartz mineral grains 79
quartz rock fragments 15
chert grains 2
chert matrix : 3
zircon, tourmaline, sphene <i

4.6 Woocalla Dolomite

A 4233 (Woocalla Basal Dolomitic Shale, Sweet Nel1)

The hand specimen indicates a fair amount of
definitely 'specky' chalcopyrite and possible bornite
and chalcocite present in a freshly exposed fracture
across the bedding. Polished section shows opaque sulphides
to be specks of chalcopyrite of size range approximately
0.20 mm down to 0.02 mm and are squarish to irregular in
shape, some contain inclusions of pyrite. The sulphides
have recrystallised as secondary mineralisation since
they have mutual boundaries with coarse crystallised

secondary quartz in laminae.

In this section the rock is seen to contain
fine grain dolomite crystals alternating with opaque
matter, much of which is hematitic/manganiferous, although

[owes

===== page 59 (ocr)
 

 

- 52 - 001290

some subhedral sulphides are also seen. The grain size
of the dolomite averages about 0.01 mm, and of the opaque
subhedral minerals around 0.02 mm. Stringers of quartz
as mosaics (individual grains vary 0.16 to 0.5 mm)
associated with similar size clear carbonate grains which
are probably secondary. Some grains of detrital quartz
are also present. ‘

Modal volume percent mineral composition :-

dolomite (fine grained) 74
dolomite, recrystallised (coarse grained) 2
quartz

wad/hematite 20
chalcopyrite <1

The above specimen is’a sulphide bearing
horizon which is possibly the original source of part of
the copper in the Pandurra Quartzite/Whyalla Sandstone
where it has been precipitated after leaching from the
dolomite. Before weathering the rock consisted of a

‘fine grained manganiferous dolomite (Ref. 4).

4.7 Woocalla Quarry

A 4231

A fine granular dolomite, brown stained
(average 0.01 mm in size) contains many scattered
patches of manganese wad, some exhibiting fine opaque
needle-like growths and patches of limonite. Clear
recrystallised and coarser (average 0.3 mm) rhombs of
carbonate have narrow zones of exsolved limonite
particles around edges of individual grains or along
cleavages. Particle limonite is scattered throughout

the fine primary dolomite.

Fragments of detrital quartz (to 0.08 mm) also
occur scattered through the rock.

[ones

===== page 60 (ocr)
 

- 53 - 000121

Disposition of manganese wad dendrites, some
carbonate euhedra and cherty quartz indicate the presence
of crude bedding planes. Thin sub-parallel fissures
(0.05 mm width) in the rock contain clear secondary
carbonate and 'recrystallised' wad, alternately in the >
same fissure. Most fissures parallel the bedding planes
but a minor number cross-cut the bedding.

It is suggested that the dolomite recrystallised
under the influence of percolating meteoric waters to
reject Mn as MnO. +

Modal volume percent composition :-

primary dolomite 82
secondary dolomite/calcite 10
wad , . 5
limonite 1
detrital quartz : : 2

Fine fissures which developed along and across

‘bedding of the dolomite demonstrate an easy method of

transportation of metal values in solution through or
from the dolomite. Solution of manganese bearing
dolomite with recrystallisation to clear manganese-—free
carbonate shows that solution and recrystallisation in
situ after release of base metal values occurred.

4.8 Pernatty Lagoon/Mystery Area

A 4237 (D.H. 3-6-1D, 13.4m)

A pale cream, fine-grained dolomite with grain
size approximately 0.008 mm with lenticles of coarser
(secondary) carbonate, grain size averaging 0.08 mm,
scattered detrital quartz grains to 0.1 mm and scattered
pyrite cubes (average 0.016 mm); also traces of zircon

are present.

[ves

===== page 61 (ocr)
 

_ 54 ok 000122

Shadowy Collenia growth-lines are seen in the
dolomite indicated by alternating laminae of carbonate of
different grain size.

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

dolomite (fine) 95
dolomite (coarse, secondary) 4
quartz — <i
pyrite <1
zircon : , <1

A 4240 (D.H. 3-6-2D, 14.3m)

Almost pure dolomite but as dolomitic ooliths,
average 0.16 mm diameter to 2 mm's ovoid or circular cells
showing well marked walls of finer carbonate crystals.
Cherty quartz has replaced the interior carbonate of
some grains leaving the carbonate cell-wall intact;
scattered fluid inclusions (approximately l,/<) are seen
in carbonate. Quartz grains vary between 0.20 up to 1.3
mm in size. Stylolites marked by their peculiar undulating
seams lined by opaque matter, are seen.

Pettijohn (Ref. 5) suggests that oolite structures
of this type may be algal pisolites. In any case whether
of organic or inorganic origin they are a shallow water

facies.

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-
dolomite 99
quartz . 1
opaque matter <1

A 4243 (D.H. 3-6-3D, 23.5m)

Collenia felt-like structures indicated by
difference in grain size of dolomite grains (.002 mm to
-Ol mm). Baryte showing 90° cleavages, low birefringence,

occurs as short prisms located in vugs in the dolomite

Joves

===== page 62 (ocr)
- 55 - 000123

groundmass or between laminae of structures. The baryte
is generally surrounded by coarse, clear, recrystallised

carbonate.

Occasional detrital quartz and fine scattered

opaques (approximately 0.01 mm) are present.

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

dolomite 99
baryte , 1
quartz <1
opaque minerals <L1

A 4244 (D.H. 3-6-3D, 34.0m)

Pale dolomite, showing undulating and bifurcating
Collenia structures. As in previous sections, the banding
is indicated by differences in dolomite crystals size
(0.006 to 0.02 mm). Scattered fluid inclusions
(approximately l1,<) are seen in clear dolomite grains.

Grains of detrital quartz (approximately 0.06 mm),
irregular or sharply angular, occur scattered through the
section. Traces of baryte (approximately 0.06 mm) occur
where bands of recrystallised dolomite are seen forming

part of Collenia laminae.

A stylolite traversing the section interrupts
and displaces the Collenia structure and a residue of
baryte with some recrystallised carbonate forms along
the stylolite. A thin, even vein of recrystallised
carbonate (0.2 mm thick) traverses the Collenia structure
without displacement and joins the stylolite at an oblique

angle.

Modal mineral composition, as volume percent :-
dolomite 99
quartz 1
baryte Zi

Lowes

===== page 63 (ocr)
 

- 56 -

000124
A 4248 (D.H. 4-6-4D, 22.2m)

. Wavy, lenticular Collenia forms are seen faintly,
the laminae showing up as differences in grain size from
average 0.01 to 0.024 mm. Ovoid structures as well as
continuous almost parallel undulating laminae are
observed. The coarser carbonate show the zones between
the actual narrower Collenia felts. Laths (approximately
-2 x .3 mm) of baryte intergrown in sheaves and baryte as
granules with characteristic rectangular cleavage, straight
extinction and with low birefringence are seen in vugs in
the dolomite. A little cherty quartz occurs scattered
around the section associated with coarse recrystallised

dolomite in vugs.

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

dolomite 99
baryte 1
detrital quartz <1
chert. . <1

In the Woocalla Dolomite group, sulphide is
seen only in the basal dolomite 'shale' as fine specks. |
The dolomite from Woocalla Quarry contains wad and this
could have soaked up any copper formerly present in
sulphides and now pseudomorphed by clots of limonite
in the rock.

The Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon dolomites show
Collenia growths in abundance and the dolomite (by thin-
section) is seen to be almost pure. Collenia is known
to have grown in muddy waters on inter-tidal mud flats
(Ref. 3) and in these specimens there is a general dearth of
particulate sand, silt and clay-size sediment apart from
dolomite. These Collenia therefore grew on dolomite-mud
banks around or within a lagoon which contained appreciable
saline water, rather different from the present-day condition
of the mainly dry Pernatty Lagoon around the shores of

[vvee

===== page 64 (ocr)
 

” - 57 - ~ _ 800125
which the fossil Collenia reefs are situated. The
catchment around the ‘Lagoon was low-lying so that little
or no clastic material was washed in by flood waters.
Evaporation of carbonate waters under saline conditions
would produce a dolomite mud almost free from

clastic impurities. But whence the copper?

4.9 Whyalla Sandstone/Main Open Cut

All sections A 4251, 4253 and 4255; and A 4011
collected in July 1971 are texturally aifferent except in

rounding of the larger quartz grains.

A 4251 (D.H. 3-4-1D, 6.4m) - Rounded, Equigranular

Rounded to subangular quartz grains and more
equigranular than in other Whyalla Sandstone samples
collected. However, diagenetic activity has expelled
most of the clay matrix and growth on originally
spherical quartz grains (seen by relict particulate
hematite trains and few fluid inclusions - to 2) has
produced ragged margins around many grains and a quartz
mosaic of complex sutured grains has resulted, varying
between 0.1 and 0.7 mm, average 0.6 mm. Quartz rock
fragments, rounded to angular, made up of tiny quartz
grains (average 0.06 mm) as mosaics, are common and also
some quartz gneiss grains. ° Rounded, brown-red hematite
mottled chert grains are fairly common (average 0.4 mm).
Traces of kaolinite occur in chert grains and in

interstices.

Modal mineral analysis as volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 92
quartz rock fragments 5
chert grains . 3
sericite/kaolinite gi
hematite (in chert) KL 1
opaque minerals <i

fovee

===== page 65 (ocr)
 

 

- 58 - - 0001286

A 4253 (D.H. 3-4-2D, 7.5m) ~ poorly sorted, inequigranuiar

A very poorly-sorted sandstone containing large
clasts of angular quartz rock (to 3 mm). Outside the
grossly ill-sorted zone is a layer where smaller subangular
grains (approximately 0.3 mm) occur with occasional large
rounded grains (approximately 1 mm) to be seen. The
subangularity of the small grains is seen locally to be
due to extensive silicification of the grains. Curved
boundaries between quartz grains is not common but where
it eccurs it shows unstable pressure solution conditions

‘during diagenesis. Many grains show strain shadow effects

apparently unrelated to the present fabric since they occur
scattered through the rock fabric among grains which show

no strain.

Quartz rock fragments are sparse and occur in
the larger size ranges to 1 mm. Chert grains are sporadic,
some are chalcedonic and are approximately the size of
average quartz grains overall (0.42 mm). Quartz mineral
grains vary from 0.1 to 0.8 mm. Chert matrix has replaced
much of the original kaolinite except in most cases for a
narrow selvage of clay between the quartz grains and
central core of chert in channelways. Hematite dust
present is largely within chert grains or is residual in
chert matrix. Cavities in the rock surrounded by narrow
zones of chalcedonic fibres, scattered. zircon grains and
a little rutile are seen in the interstices associated
with opaque detritus.

In areas where both complex suturing and straight-
line contacts occur between quartz grains it appears that
the latter type of diagenetic crystallisation occurred
before the former and overprints it.

[ower

===== page 66 (ocr)
 

- 59 -~ 000127

Modal mineral comparison as volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 93
quartz rock fragments (mainly gneiss) . 2
chert grains (mainly chalcedony ‘

chert matrix 2
kaolinite, hematite, rutile, zircon, opaques <1

A 4255 (D.H. 3-4-3D, 6.1m) - fairly equigranular and
much altered by silicification

Similar to A 4253 in state of recrystallisation
but better sized. Angularity of originally rounded grains
is very marked in this specimen; complex suturing of mutual,
parallel, interpenetrating finger-like growths between
grains. Many grains appear to have completely recrystallised
and pockets of chalcedony occur where possibly kaolinite
matrix previously resided. Hair-line fractures have
developed in some quartz grains. It was noted that in
mineralised specimens these are frequently filled with
atacamite. Quartz mineral grains 0.1 to 1 mm, average
0.5 mm; similar size range for quartz rock fragments.
Chert grains 0.1 to 0.5 mm average 0.4 mm. Interstices-
are studded with occasional rounded zircon (approximately
0.08 mm) and prismatic, stumpy tourmaline grains.

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains ' 91
quartz rock fragments (some gneiss) 5
chert grains “3
chert matrix . 1
hematite particles, zircon, tourmaline <1

A 4011 (Collected in July 1971 : See Specimen 9A - Ref. 2)

‘Very similar to A 4253 in being poorly sorted and
of similar fine and coarse grain sizes, but diagenesis
(silicification) here is incomplete with up to 3 volume
percent kaolinite remaining in channels of only a few

[owes

===== page 67 (ocr)
 

- 60 - ~ 000128

microns width between quartz grains. The quartz rock to
mineral ratio is rather higher for A 4011 in being 91:5
as against 92:2 for A 4253.

There is also a greater abundance of chert
fragments and matrix in A 4253.

4.10 West Lagoon (see Pacminex Report PMR. 270/71 — Ref. 2)

A 4001, 4003, 4004, 4007 and 4008 (Collected in July 1971)

There is generally more chert in the matrix than
was reported in PMR. 270/72 but still appreciable kaolinite
present. Specimens A 4003, 4004, 4007 and 4008 are all very
similar in texture with large spherical quartz mineral grains
mainly, but also some very round rocks fragments and chert
grains varying between 0.05 and 1.6 mm but there is a
'‘size-range' gap between 0.05 and 0.2 mm. The small
angular and subangular quartz grains occupying the
interstices between large grains constitute a separate
silt generation of different origin from the much larger
round grains of aeolian origin. The matrix, apart from’
silt sized quartz grains is chert replacing kaolinite or
sulphide. In specimens 4004, 4007 and 4008 there is an
abundance of rounded chert grains.

Specimen A 4001 is very different from any of
the other West Lagoon, Whyalla Sandstone specimens collected
in that it contains moderately well sorted, rounded to
subangular quartz grains of 0.2 to 0.7 mm and having a
fair amount of kaolinite cement remaining between the
grains in patchy areas. Otherwise quartz grains are
packed tightly together and are fused together by
secondary quartz to give a subangular growth shape to:
previously rounded grains indicated by narrow traces of
fine hematite particles. This specimen resembles much
more, specimens of Whyalla Sandstone described from the
Main Open Cut that are more or less equigranular such as
A 4251 and A 4255.

[aves

===== page 68 (ocr)
 

- 61 - C00129

Specimens A 4003, 4004, 4007 and 4008 are
_ interesting in that they are mineralised and also
contain two generations of different provenance :-

- one from a suspected aeolian source and another
containing the mineralisation with clay minerals
and silt sized particles and thought to have been
dumped into shallow channels together by flash
flood waters working over playa lakes and sand
dunes adjoining the lakes.

4.11 Mystery/Pernatty Lagoon

A 4242 (D.H. 3-6-3D, 17.6m) - fairly equigranular;
some interstitial carbonate

Mainly equigranular without the large rounded
grains characteristic of most of the Whyalla Sandstone
in the district. Somewhat similar in grain shapes and
sizes to A 4001 of the Whyalla Sandstone of West Lagoon
and does not appear to occur essentially at any particular
horizon of the stratigraphic unit but is just a local
horizon established when sedimentation was less dynamic.

The quartz grains vary from 0.05 to 0.48 mm,
average 0.24 mm,they range from rounded to subangular
with a moderate matrix of carbonate and less kaolinite/
sericite. The quartz grains are largely welded together
by quartz where carbonate is absent, showing an interstitial
slightly curved or straight sliver of secondary quartz a
few microns in width. Occasionally the secondary quartz
growth seen beyond the hematite particle trains and fluid
inclusions flanking primary quartz shows optical continuity
of grain growth but frequently there is displacement of
the growth pattern shown by a different optical orientation.

Quartz rock fragments, average 0.24 mm, are
fairly common and are varied - gneiss, fine mosaic, etc.

Joces

===== page 69 (ocr)
 

- fee 000130

Scattered, rounded chert grains of similar size are
speckled with opaque hematite/limonite.

Microcline feldspar shows incipient sericitisation
along cleavages but still displays twinning; albite occurs
as clear square prisms with sharp albite twinning and is
possibly diagenetic. Opaque minerals occur as large
anhedra, average size 1.0 mm. Carbonate occurs as cement
between quartz grains or as clear interstitial anhedra,
average 0.10 mm.

Modal volume percent of minerals present :-

quartz mineral grains 89
quartz rock fragments 5
chert fragments 2
albite and microcline feldspar ‘ 1
carbonate . 3
kaolinite/sericite : <1
tourmaline <1

A 4247 (D.H. 3-6-4D, 15.2 m) — large rounded quartz
mineral grains and rock fragments as per normal .
Whyalla Sandstone, but much carbonate matrix

A rock with wide differences in grain size and
matrix content. The large round quartz grains vary from
0.32 to 2 mm (average 0.32 mm). The 2 mm diameter grain
is a rock fragment. One large rounded albite grain, 0.5
mm diameter altering to kaolinite along cleavages is seen.
Smaller, mainly angular to subangular quartz grains or
roughly 0.080 mm equigranular size are just above the
maximum for silt size (0.062 mm) and are of different
provenance from the larger grains. They are accompanied
by similar sized grains of chert, kaolinite and a little
albite.

Large rounded chert grains up to 2 mm of similar
size ranges to the quartz grains occur, some show a little

[aves

===== page 70 (ocr)
 

-63- 200131

kaolinite/sericite development as seen in A 4242 as well

as of fine opaque matter.

Apart from being present as fine matrix the
carbonate occurs as large angular clasts of pure carbonate
to over 2 mm in size and containing ovoid algal structures.
These are obviously fragments of now eroded parts of the
underlying Woocalla Dolomite.

Opaque minerals as subhedra (average 0.080 mm)
occur in the matrix occasionally as cement between quartz

er in rock fragments.

Modal volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains (large) 68
quartz mineral grains (small) . 10
quartz rock fragments 2
chert fragments : 2
albite feldspar , gi
carbonate matrix 7
‘carbonate clasts 10
kaolinite/sericite g1-
opaque minerals : : 1

The Whyalla Sandstone contains many large rounded
grains of aeolian origin, mainly quartz mineral grains but
the largest are also of quartz rock fragments and chert
from some previous eroded rock formation. The matrix
quartz grains are frequently quite angular and ag
previously suggested are silt from one time neighbouring

playa lakes.

Variation in composition of clasts and matrix
may reflect the nature of adjoining and/or underlying
deposit as for example Woocalla Dolomite beneath the
Whyalla Sandstone in the Pernatty Lagoon/Mystery area;
Pandurra Quartzite beneath the Whyalla Sandstone in the

Main Open Pit. A periodic slowing-up in the speed of

Jveee

===== page 71 (ocr)
 

 

~ 64. - 200132

deposition of the Whyalla Sandstone produces the
equigranular fine to medium grained subangular quartz.

grain deposits.

Constant recycling of clastic material in the
area has eliminated all but a minimum of detrital heavy
minerals generally of minimal zircon or tourmaline.

The presence of fresh microcline indicates a
dry palao climate with periodic violent flooding. Now
see below.

4.12 Plateau_Exposure (just north of the Main Open Pit)

A 4234

’
In hand specimen feldspars appear of roughly

similar size to rounded quartz grains but some have

oblong shape and alteration to clay mineral is observed.

The large round quartz grains (0.3 to 1.3 mn,

‘average 0.6 mm) have grown by quartz addition from

percolating solutions containing silica to fuse with
neighbouring grains. Here the original grain iimits

are rarely demonstrated by hematite particles but more
frequently by a fine ovoid or circular 'crack' containing

fine opaque particles.

Quartz rock fragments are rounded and of
similar grain size to rounded quartz mineral grains.

Large rounded chert grains (approximately 1.2 mm),
show outgrowths of tiny quartz in mosaics to join
continuous overgrowths of neighbouring quartz grains.

“The feldspar grains of a polyhedral or rounded
outline are decomposed to kaolinite, range up to 1-2 mm,
average 0.5 mm.

[owes

===== page 72 (ocr)
. ~ 65 - 000138

The absence of second generation of fine quartz
or chert fragments is noted.

Modal volume percent :-

quartz mineral grain : 93
quartz rock fragments

microcline feldspar (now kaolinite). 2
chert grains 1

No heavy mineral grains are present.

A_4235

very similar to A 4234 except that quartz
rock fragments are more variable in the larger size
ranges, though the average is about the same and quartz
grains contain occasional flakes of muscovite (approximately
0.020 mm).

Modal mineral volume percent :-

quartz mineral grains 92
‘quartz rock fragments 5.
chert grains : 1
microcline feldspar (now kaolinite) 2
tourmaline <i
opaque mineral gi
muscovite Kl

4.13 Tregolana Shale : Pernatty Lagoon/Mystery Area

A 4239 (D.H. 3-6-2D, 5.0m)

A fine grained intergrowth of cherty quartz
(maximum 0.050 mm, average 0.015 mm), sericite flakes
(average 0.04 x 0.015 mm) and fine opaques and hematite
particles (range 0.003 to 0.050 mn, average 0.006 mm) in
the interstices. Scattered carbonate granules (0.013 to

0.026 mm) occur.

[eves

===== page 73 (ocr)
 

2 Te 800184

Fine, parallel, linear concentrations of
quartz grains, sericite and hematite particles gives
a banded appearance to the rock.

The quartz is clear of inclusions and variable
in shape from angular to rounded, and is similar to the
fine matrix quartz - in its varied shapes-in most
Whyalla Sandstone samples. ©

Modal mineral composition as volume percent :-

quartz 78
sericite 17
carbonate 1
hematite 3
opaque minerals 1

A 4246 (D.H. 3-6-4D, 5.5m)

Similar to A 4239 in nature of minerals, sizes,
shapes and banding but the proportions of sericite and
quartz are different and with the additional presence of

‘kaolinite this rock is more argillaceous.

Quartz grains, range 0.016 to 0.11 mm, average
0.017 mm.

Sericite flakes, range 0.03 to 0.10 mm, width
approximately 0.03 mm.

Hematite/opaque grains 0.004 to 0.02 mm,
average 0.006 mm. .

Modai mineral composition, volume percent :-

quartz 20
sericite 72
kaolinite’

carbonate

hematite/opaques

Loves

===== page 74 (ocr)
. - 67 - 2001385
Variations in mineral concentrations shown by

banding indicate seasonal variations in climate, i.e.
velocity of run-off water entering the depositional
environment, since apart from fine bands or lenticles

of carbonate and kaolinite rich bands, the nature of
minerals present as shown by drill core is fairly constant
with depth in this stratigraphic unit in the Mystery area.

4.14 Mount Gunson : Corruburra_ Sandstone

Some variations in appearance were noted in the field
and hand specimens of each of the varieties seen were
collected and sectioned.

A 4222 (chocolate brown, coarse grained)

Grain shapes of quartz are slab-like and angular
to ovoid; many grains were originally ovoid as indicated
by interal fine particle limonite trains but have been
made angular by diagenetic silica growth; now fairly
equigranular. Many grains show strain shadows and some

‘lath-like grains show Béhm lamellae and are apparently

of metamorphic origin. Many grains are completely strain
free. Quartz grains range from 0.05 to 0.24 mm, average
0.09 mm. Hematite/limonite particles form a cement where
quartz growth due to diagenesis has not penetrated the
interstices. The limonite cement is of fairly regular
thickness (to 0.009 mm) and limonite also occurs densely
in sporadic chert grains which themselves are similar in
shape and size to quartz grains. Quartz rock fragments
are also of similar size to quartz mineral grains and are

of minor importance.

Microcline as fresh grains are detrital,
subangular, and of similar grain size to neighbouring
quartz grains (to 0.2 mm, average 0.08 mm) and cemented
with hematite/limonite.

oven

===== page 75 (ocr)
a - 68 -— oO NG01386

Heavy minerals are shown by scattered rounded
barrel-shaped zircon: grains (approximately 0.08 mm) clear
of debris and yellowish-green detrital pleochroic tourmaline

of similar grain size.

_ Clay mineral as kaolinite platelets occupies
scattered pockets in the rock of up to 0.3 x 0.15 mm in

size.

Muscovite, detrital, as long thin plates (to
0.3 mm) are present in trace amounts.

The tabular, quartz-muscovite, micaceous chert
and some clay pockets give a very rudimentary bedding to
the rock.

Modal mineral volume percent composition :-
quartz mineral grains 86
quartz rock fragments

i

microcline

chert grains

micaceous chert

muscovite

limonite pseudomorphs of magnetite (2)
limonite/hematite, interstitial

zircon

PRPEN UF WP eB

NN

tourmaline

A fairly well-sorted sandstone which contains
rather more heavy minerals but of still limited quartz
grain size variation compared with the underlying
Whyalla Sandstone. A moderate abundance of lamellar
strained quartz shows a metamorphic source for much of

this quartz.

Loves

===== page 76 (ocr)
 

- 69 - - 000137

A 4223 (red-brown and flaggy)

More coarse grained than A 4222, more equigranular
put marked by finer and coarser bands of quartz. This
sample is cleaner, with less cementing matrix of hematite/
limonite. The grains are rounded to-subangular. Range
of grain sizes in different bands 0.1 to 0.8 mm, average
0.3 mm; 0.05 to 0.4 mm, average 0.2 mm.

As in the previous section described, the quartz
is present mainly as mineral grains. Few grains show strain-

‘shadows, otherwise the grains are relatively strain-free.

Similarly, many grains are joined one to another through
diagenetic addition of quartz to the grains but many have
retained a hematite/limonite cement of maximum 0,008 mm

thickness.

The usual fine trains of hematite particles
within quartz grain margins indicate a slightly more
rounded grain before diagenesis, although in this rock ~
silica diagenesis was very slight and the hematite
particles are just within the quartz grain boundaries.
Close packing of quartz grains before diagenesis occured
leaving minimal space for quartz growth, although isolated
pockets of clay occur measuring from 0.06 to 0.65 mm
square and some pockets contain a high proportion of
limonite.

A few large (approximately 0.1 mm) detrital
gircon grains are seen but traces only of opaque
mineral are present which are now pseudomorphed by

Limonite.

No feldspar is seen.

[owns

===== page 77 (ocr)
 

- 70 - 0001388

Modal mineral volume percent composition :-

quartz mineral grains 92
quartz rock fragments . 1
kaolinite 5
hematite/limonite 2
opaque minerals <i
zircon . <i

A_4224 (pale, leached, massive sandstone)

Similar in grain size to A 4222 but less matrix
and abundant magnetite. The quartz grains are subangular
to rounded, range 0.03 to 0.50 mm, average 0.10 mm. Few
quartz rock fragments of similar size are seen. However
many quartz grains show strain shadows, Béhm lamellae and
other evidence of strain. However, since they are
scattered among many grains which exhibit no strain
effects it is assumed that many of them are derived from
metamorphic rocks of distant provenance. Many quartz
grains show fused, faintly curved boundaries and many
show an inner more rounded grain outlined by hematite
particles or fluid inclusions (<1,+) adjoining grain
boundaries.

Scattered oblong fresh microcline grains,
average 0.1 mm, are present, also muscovite flakes as
fine shreds to 0.3 x 0.1 mm, but commonly 0.1 x 0.04 mm
and with frequent elongated yellowish clay (illite ?)
flakes in pockets give a banded appearance to the. rock.

A little clear wedge-shaped sphene, rounded
zircon (0.08 mm) and tourmaline as detrital grains are

seen.

‘Magnetite (or limonite pseudomorphs) ,

interstitial, around 0.05 mm.

Jovee

===== page 78 (ocr)
 

sphene, zircon, tourmaline

-n - 600189

Some concentration of heavy minerals has taken
place here yet the even-grained nature of quartz does not

suggest turbulent current action.

Modal mineral volume percent :-
quartz mineral grains : : 83
quartz rock fragments
microcline
kaolinite/illite ?
magnetite (mainly altered to limonite)

POAOrREF

4.15 Mount Gunson : Simmens Quartzite

A 4221

In hand specimens it is seen to be markedly

current bedded.

The thin-section shows an approximately even-.
grained mosaic of quartz and virtual absence of soft clay,
limonite, etc, matrix between the quartz grains. Coarser
grained than Corruburra Sandstone (A 4222, 4224) and more
even grained than A 4223. Fairly equigranular at range
0.08 to 0.32 mm, average 0.24 mm. Diagenesis has
produced quartz grains of subangular aspect with gently
curved contacts, showing an originally more rounded primary
nucleus, enclosed by fine hematite particle trains in some
cases. Flattened, angular or ovoid chert grains of roughly
similar grain size (average 0.16 mm) to quartz mineral
grains occur. The chert grains vary somewhat in matrix
composition with apart from minute quartz grains (0.010
to 0.015 mm size) they also contain fine flakes of mica
(clay ?) and/or hematite flakes.

Some chertification is seen around edges of

occasional quartz grains.

[oeee

===== page 79 (ocr)
*

- 72 - ~ 000140

Fluid inclusions (up to 5c) occur abundantly
within some quartz grains but are not abundant along
quartz grain boundaries.

Fairly abundant fresh microcline as stumpy
prisms and some kaolinite pseudomorphs of microcline,
range 0.08 to 0.24 mm, average size 0.16 mm are seen
scattered through the section.

Trace amounts of tourmaline, zircon, topaz and
purplish fluorite are present.

The rock could be called a sub-feldspathic lithic
arenite - Williams, et al (Ref. 7).

Modal mineral volume percent constituents :-

quartz mineral grains 92
chert grains 2
microcline

zircon, tourmaline, sphene, purplish rutile ~1
apatite ?

Many quartz grains show strain shadows but
only very few show lamellae strain characteristics.

4.16 Fluid Inclusions

Quartz mineral grains and rock fragments were
examined in detail for fluid inclusions.

The quartz grains of all rock units contained
fluid inclusions, usually between 1 and 2 microns in size,
sometimes to 5 microns. The smaller inclusions are ovoid,
round or oblong; larger inclusions are generally somewhat
irregular and have the appearance of sealed-off capillaries.

Both Whyalla Sandstone and Pandurra Quartzite
contain quartz grains with abundant fluid inclusions.
These are mainly in narrow or broad zones of overgrowths

Lovee

===== page 80 (ocr)
73 - _ 000141

around primary quartz grains, frequently the zone begins
approximately 5 microns in from the wall of the grain.
Fluid inclusions adjoining the wall of quartz grains are
frequently intermixed with tiny hematite platelets. Planes
of weakness due to stress will often contain myriads of
fluid inclusions, occasionally as small as 0.1 microns,

but are also large (to 5 microns) and are frequently

strung out as continuous lines of tubular inclusions which
originally together formed capillaries that have become
divided by quartz deposition. Gneiss grains which have

.vecrystallised, show streams of inclusion along the

constituent mineral grain boundaries and chert grains also
contain large numbers of tiny disoriented fluid inclusions.

Commonly, tiny gas bubbles are seen in the smaller
inclusions, approximately 2 microns in size and also
occasionally in the larger inclusions. Each gas bubble
is of fairly constant ( 5 to 10 volume percent) of total
enclosing cavity but occasionally is present in higher
ratio to liquid. Fewer grains show crystal inclusions
particularly if a gas bubble is present. “In one West
Lagoon, Pandurra Quartzite specimen a tiny cube crystal”
of halite was seen. In the Main Open Pit Pandurra
Quartzite specimens, tiny flakes of hematite (?) are
seen in the fluid of the inclusions.

Fluid inclusions are particularly abundant in
the Main Open Pit Whyalla Sandstone and Pandurra Quartzite
specimens, scattered through quartz overgrowths, or along
planes of weakness in the quartz grains. Scattered fluid
inclusions are seen in malachite in the Pandurra Quartzite
but no gas bubbles are seen.

_In West Lagoon specimens the inclusions to a
great extent follow outer zones of quartz overgrowth
formed during diagenesis.

[owes

===== page 81 (ocr)
5 “eoo142
Fluid inclusions in the Pernatty Lagoon/
Mystery specimens of Woocalla Dolomite are sparse and
tend to be confined to the boundaries of small carbonate
grains. Very few are embedded in individual grains. In
the Pandurra Quartzite, fluid inclusions are as abundant
and are distributed as per the Pandurra Quartzite of West

Lagoon.

The Pandurra Quartzite of Woocalla Quarry show
abundant fluid inclusions in overgrowths associated with

particles of hematite and limonite, also in diagonal

cross zones of weakness in recrystallised quartz gneiss
grains as fluid inclusions only. Very few gas bubbles
are seen in fluid inclusions here.

In the Whyalla Sandstone from the "Plateau area"
west of the Mill, fluid inclusions occur patchily inside
quartz grains to 5 microns and are of rather irregular size; some
pubbles occur in fluid. Zonal distribution in overgrowths

is thin or absent.

Simmens Quartzite, quartz grains show very fine
inclusions in criss-crossing diagonal planes (zones of
weakness), some contain gas. Few fluid inclusions are
seen to occur.

. The Cormburra Sandstone grains show some planes
of weakness where tabular inclusions (approximately 4 x 2
microns) with long axes parallel to the plane indicate
original fine fissures which trapped fluid and then
became sealed by secondary quartz.

As a matter of interest zircon, tourmaline and
on an occasion apatite grains are seen embedded in quartz
overgrowths alongside fluid inclusions.

[ones

===== page 82 (ocr)
as - 000143

: REFERENCES

DAPPLES, E.C. 'Diagenesis.of Sandstones' in Larsen, G.
and Chillinger, G.V. 'Diagenesis in Sediments'
Published by Elsevier 1967.

CURTIS, P.J. A Petrographic/Mineragraphic Examination
of some Mt. Gunson Ore Specimens from the West
Lagoon and Main Open Pits. PMR. 270/71.

‘LOGAN, B.W., REZAK, R. & GINZBURG, R.N. Classification

and Environmental Significance of Algal Stromatolites
- Journal of Geology 72, pp. 68-83, 1962.

BARNET, M.T. Personal communication.

PETTIJOHN, F.J. Sedimentary Rocks - Second Edition, -
Published 1957 ~ Harper and Row, N.Y.

JOHNS, R.K. Geology and Mineral Resources of the
Andamooka-Torrens area. Bulletin No. 41. Geological
Survey of South Australia, 1968.

WILLIAMS, H., TURNER, F.J. & GILBERT, C.M. Petrography,
An Introduction to the Study of Rocks in Thin-Section
- 1954. Published W.H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco.

PALACHE, C., BERMAN, H. & FRONDEL, C. ‘Dana's System of
Mineralogy, Vol. II - Seventh Edition 1951.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Inc. N.Y.

DEER, W.A., HOWIE, R.A. & ZUSSMAN, J. Rock Forming

Minerals Vol. 5 - Non-silicates. Published by
Longmans, London, 1967.

[ovee

===== page 83 (ocr)
10

11

12

13

-14

15

16

17

. - 76 - 000144

RANKAMA, K. & SAHAMA, T.G. Geochemistry - Published by
University of Chicago Press. 1950.

JOHNS, R.K. Copper and Manganese Ore Deposits of Pernatty
Lagoon - Geology of Australian Ore Deposits Vol. I.
8th Commonwealth Mining & Metallurgical Congress, 1965.

KING, H.F. Pernatty Lagoon and Mt. Gunson, S.A. - Memo,
Consolidated Zinc Pty Ltd., 7th May 1953.

DICKINSON, S.B. Copper and Manganese Deposits of the
Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon District. Geology of
Australian Ore Deposits, 5th Empire Mining and
Metallurgical Congress, 1953.

‘

MACCARTHY, G-R. Eolian Sands : A Comparison - American
Journal of Science, Vol. XXX, No. 176, August 1935,
pp. 6-95. :

.GARLICK, W.G. The Geology of the Northern Rhodesian

Copperbelt - Ed. by F. Mendelsohn - Published by
McDonald, London 1961.

GARLICK, W.G. ‘Special Features and Sedimentary Facies
of Stratiform Sulphide Deposits in Arenites' from
‘Sedimentary Ores' - Ed. by C.H. James, Proceedings
of 15th Inter University Geological Congress, 1967,
University of Leicester, England. -

BRANDT, R.T. Relationship of Mineralisation to
Sedimentation at Mufulira, Northern Rhodesia - Bull.
of the Institute of Mining & Metallurgy,. London,

No. 666, Transactions 71 - pp. 459-479.

[owes

===== page 84 (ocr)
18

9

20

a1

22

23

24

25

2 oT 000145

WHYTE, R.J. & GREEN, M.E. Geology and Palaeogeography of
Chibuluma West Orebody Zambian Copperbelt ~- Economic
Geology 66, pp. 400-424. 1971.

WHITE, W.S. & WRIGHT, J.C. The White Pine Copper Deposit,
Ontonagon County, Michigan, Economic Geology 49,
pp. 675-716. 1954. ,

STANTON, R.L. General Features of Conformable 'Pyritic'
Orebodies. Part I, Field Association. Trans. Canadian
Inst. of Mining & Metallurgy 63, 1960, pp. 22-27.
(Canadian Min. Metall. Bull. No. 573, January 1960,
pp. 24-29)

DARNLEY, A.G. Petrology of some Rhodesian Copperbelt
orebodies and associated rocks. Discussion by
P. Gilmour. Trans. Inst. Min. Metall. London 69.
1959-1960. (Bull. Inst. Min. Metall. London
No. 646, 1960) pp. 699-700.

FRASER, D.C. Organic Sequestration of Copper - Economic
Geology 56, pp. 1063-1078, 1961.

OBERC, J. & SERKIES, J. Evolution of the Fore-Sudetian
Copper Deposit - Economic Geology 63, pp- 372-379,
1968.

BROWN, J.S. South-east Missouri Lead Belt, Field Trip
No. 1., Geological Society America Guide Book for
Field Trips - 1958.

GRIP, E. The Lead Deposits of the Eastern Border of the

Caledonides in Sweden. Proc. Int. Geol. Congr.,
21st Session, 1960, pp. 149-159.

[owes

===== page 85 (ocr)
26

‘27

28

29

0090146

. - 78 -
GIGNOUX, M. Stratigraphic Geology (trans. by G.G. Woodford)
-published by W.H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco - 1955.

p. 215.

BURGER, D. Private communication.

‘ROEDDER, E. Fluid inclusions as samples of the ore

forming fluids. Berlingske Bogtrylklein XxI
International Geological Congress Procs. of
Section 16 - ‘Genetic problems of ores' 1959
pp. 218-229.

ROEDDER, E., INGRAM, B. & HALL, W.F. Studies of £luid
inclusions III : Extraction and Quantitative
Analysis of inclusions in the milligram range.
Economic Geology 58, 1963, pp. 353-374.

P.J. CURTIS
(EMH)

