===== page 1 (ocr)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 1 4
MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, CHEMICAL ANALYSES (W, ; ) BY CSR CENTRAL LABORATORY
Sample Field Sample Total Total 'Oxide'! Chrysocolla Malachite Chalcocite ALO Pole Insol. Cl
No. No. Cu Fe Cu Cu Cu Cu
A 4000 Mt. Gunson Mill Feed
8.20 am, 15/7/1971 0.66 4.03 0.10 - * 0.56 - * -
A 4001 2A Lithic Sandstone
West Lagoon’ 0.35 0.76 0.01 - ~ 0.34 - a -
A 4005 4 Red Quartzite Ore
. West Lagoon 438 0.09 0.33 - - 4.05 3.23 - -
A 4006 5 Red Quartzite Ore
West Lagoon 2.69 0.18 0.23 ~ - 2.46 - - =
A 4007 5A Lithic Sandstone
: immed., above Red . y .
Quartzite, West Lagoon 9.13 0.39 0.47 ~ - 8.66 2.23 - -
o
A 4008 6A Lithic Sandstone : , ;
West Lagoon 6.66 0.11 0.83 ~ - 5.83 2.04 - ~
A 4009 6B Red Quartzite . : . \
West Lagoon 0.32 0.06 “0.05 - - p 0.28 - - ~
A 4010 6c Red Quartzite : ~ o *
West Lagoon 1.01 0.06 0.21 - a - 0.80 - - -
A 4012 9B Red Quartzite
Main Open Cut 8.34 ~ - 6.44 0.87 N.D. - 0.10 0.3
#
A 4013A 10 Metallurgical +
Test Area 10.31% = - 8.51 0.77 N.D. 0.54 0.15 0.3
A 40130 10 nO 149k ~ - 44.27 N.D. - 0.05 o.4
N.D. : Not detected | . ‘ ~
od :
'Oxide' Cu : Acid soluble copper (non-sulphide) and will include about half Cu O present.

Chrysocolla Cu
Malachite Cu
Chalcocite Cu

TBE float but included originally, malachite locked to crushed chrysocolla grains.

Determined from carbonate analysis as no alkaline earth carbonates were seen in thin-section.

Could include other sulphides present such as chalcopyrite, digenite, bornite and covellite and also half of any tenorite
present.

===== page 2 (ocr)
, TABLE 2 ~ 900185

| MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, CALCULATED MINERAL COMPOSITIONS (FROM CSR CENTRAL LABORATORY ANALYSES)

 

 

 

MT. GUNSON COPPER ORES, ee eee eee EE ————————e——EEE—EEE
Sample No. Field No. Sample Chalcocit? Malachite Chrysocolla Atacamite Kaolinite Calcium Phosphate
cad Cc 0 0. i . i
. Cu,s (OH) 60, CuSi0, 2H,0 CuCl, 3Cu(OH), ALO, 28i0,2H.0 Cas (P0,),
ie A 4000 1 Mt. Gunson Mill
ms Feed 8.20 am .
15/7/1971 0.7 ; - - - _ .
A 4001 2A. Lithic Sandstone
West Lagoon 0.4 - oo ~ - .
A 4005 . 4 Red Quartzite Ore _ : .
: West Lagoon 5.1 - - - 8.2 -
} A 4006 5 Red Quartzite Ore
" West Lagoon 3.1 - - - ~ . ~-
A 4007 DSA Lithic Sandstone 4
s above Red
Quartzite, West .
| Lagoon 10.8 - - - 5.6 -
i
A 4008 6A Lithic Sandstone \
West Lagoon 7-3 - - ‘ - 5.2 -
“ »
A 4009 6B Red Quartzite aA . .
West Lagoon Q.4 - - ; - - -
y
A 4010 6c Red Quartzite
West Lagoon 1.0 -~ ~-' =. - -
A 4012 9B Red Quartzite : €
Main Open Cut , - 4.5 17.7 1.8 ~ 0.16
A 4013A 108 Metallurgical /
Test Area - 1.3 23.5 1.8 1.4 0.24

A 4013C 40 Main Open Cut - 1.0 39.4 2.4 -° 0.08

 

===== page 3 (ocr)
a eee

000186

Mre PJ.» Curtis.

D.G. Tonkinese 23rde October, 1973.

PANDURRA THIN SECTIONS.

a further 27 thin sections have been sent to you for study.
they are described briefly as follows:

Tas P,35 red Flaggy, micaceous siltstones; from "Pandurra".? Tregolana Shales

TH < P.39 3 . Ironstone ( conglomeratic ). Anomalous coppers

B2n7 P.3gart Whyalla Sandstone; ? basal conglomerates silicifieds from"llleroo’.

{

2159  P.40 23 Sandstone. whyalla or Corraberra? from "Illeroo".

75% Ps4lAr’ Sandstone similar to b.40, from "Lincoln Gap".

Bee? FoR “P.42 2 Whyalla Sandstone, basal, silicified.

P.43 :¥ Pandurra Formation quartzite, from regolith.
—.

TBS Poad 2 \ Silcerete, from hyalla Sandstone, basal sections

€ P.45 +9 ~Gravel - believed to be basal portion of Whyalla Sandstone Unit.

a

Sample finer grained than usual. Compare with Fs3SAs
IIS” P46 2/ whyalla Sandstone, overlying Gawler Volcanics.
p.48 :/ Pandurra Formation, from below the pre=Marinoan Zone.of silicification.

aN,

far, “P49 > Silereted gravel or conglomerate.

. 2
7 -

7166 P.49As P/ Whyalla Sandstone, silicified and containing Pandurra pebbles.

\

P,50Bs P¥Looks like Pandurra Fme, outcrops like Whyalla Sandstone.
P.51 2/? Sandstone ( Whyalla or Corraberra? ) from Tent Hill crater.
P.51Bs / Panduara Fm. Pink quartzite. Boulder in Whyalla Sandstones
WIS 'P.52 i/ ? Woocalla Dolomite, Manganiferous.
DAIS P53 : P“Whyalla Sandstone, containing chips of Gawler Volcanics.

5/9) e562 / Whyalla Sandstone, silici fied.

===== page 4 (ocr)
000187

P.57A:/ Silicified conglomerate; overlies Pandurra Formation.
Believed to have undergone pre-Marinoan silicification along
with upper section of Pandurra Formations

P.5€ 8“ Pandurra Formation grit. Unsilicified.

AQ P.60 1 PVwhyalla Sandstone, Silicified lithie sandstone.

a } a
CP,61 % Silcret? Contains fibrous laths.
Ne A
79% Ps65 2 Pe? Vihyalla Sandstone. Clay-rich layers. Similar to ( F.40, P.41A.
F.65a3 “ ? Whyalla Sandstone. Similar to P.65.
P.66 3: /Sandstone ( Whyalla or Corraberra? ).

Pe67 ¢ / Sandstone = please identify.

===== page 5 (ocr)
Ref. No. PMR 5/74
Prospect No. 405

000188
PACMINEX PTY LIMITED
PETROGRAPHY OF PANDURRA
THIN SECTIONS, IT.
SYDNEY P.J. CURTIS

January, 1974
, c.c. Library
P.Cc. Thomas }
J.H. Rattigan
R.W. Gersteling
D.G. Tonkin 4
P.J. Curtis

===== page 6 (ocr)
* 000189

i. INTRODUCTION

—_

A further 27 thin sections were sent to Head Office
for stratigraphic identification and petrographic study. The
field identification as is usual heads each description.

A series of specimens, P 2 to P 34 have already
been examined and reported (Ref. 1).
2. SUMMARY

P 35 A micaceous arenite with a similar mineral composition
to some Tregolana Shale specimens seen by the writer.

P 39 Probably a ferruginous variety of Whyalla Sandstone.

P 39A Whyalla Sandstone as suggested by rounding of quartz
grains and presence of lithic cherts. .

P 40 Corraberra Sandstone as indicated by abundance of
'flat' quartz grains, appreciable micaceous chert
and heavy minerals present.

P 41A Corraberra Sandstone as shown by appreciable ‘flat'
quartz grains and micaceous chert and abundant heavy
minerals present.

P 42 Whyalla Sandstone with sparse matrix of carbonate and
chert. :

P 43 Pandurra Formation with a 'quartz-mud' clast.

P 44 Derived Whyalla Sandstone mineral grains associated

with chalcedonic fragments in a largely opaque
cherty cement.

ye

===== page 7 (ocr)
45

46

48

49

49A

50B

51

51B

000199

Mainly cherty gravel with some 'pebbles'showing
definite affinities with basal Whyalla Sandstone.
Similar quartz grain shapes to P 39a but P 45
'pebble' is finer grained and part silicified.

A peculiar sandstone containing volcanic feldspathic
grains besides even-grained quartz and a tendency to
flat quartz grains. These properties with the
variety of heavy minerals present link the rock with
Corraberra Sandstone.

Pandurra Formation, largely silicified.

A secondary silicified_ gravel which contains abundant

_ coarse fragments of Pandurra Formation in a matrix of

Whyalla Sandstone and rock material derived from other
sources.

Whyalla Sandstone ~ silicified, with inclusions of
erratics containing fine recrystallised slightly
ferruginous chert not obviously of Pandurra Formation
origin, but this is the most likely source.

Probably Whyalla Sandstone as there is a degree of
roundness of much of the quartz present, a tendency to
a two population distribution of quartz grains and

appreciable ferruginous cherts present.

Corraberra Sandstone. Strained quartz, many small
flattened grains of quartz, the presence of
appreciable micaceous chert and appreciable leucoxene
are factors for affiliation with Corraberra Sandstone
rather than with Whyalla Sandstone.

Poor sorting of subangular quartz grains, lack of
ferruginous chert and lack of heavy minerals favour
classifying the rock as a member of the Pandurra
Formation.

Bfaee

===== page 8 (ocr)
P 52

P 53

P 56

P S7A

P 58

P 65

- 000191

Woocalla Dolomite at Mt. Gunson undoubtedly contains
manganese as part of the dolomite-molecule which
oxidises during weathering,the manganese being
released as dioxide and depositing in a diffuse
fashion to give the rock a dark appearance. In this
specimen, however, the manganese is deposited in and
around fractures.

A Whyalla Sandstone with abundant volcanic clasts.
Silicification which resulted in quartz overgrowths
has made round quartz grains take on a more angular
aspect.

Whyalla Sandstone containing quite spherical quartz,
volcanic (basaltic ?) clasts, with clay and cherty
rock cement in channelways and vugs.

A 'pebby-sand' type of conglomerate of largely
Pandurra Formation origin which has been subsequently

_silicified.

A specimen of silicified Pandurra Formation apparently

“transitional to Whyalla Sandstone.

A silicified non-standard (ref. Mount Gunson) Whyalla
Sandstone showing rough sorting of grains. The
typical large round quartz grains and abundant volcanic
cherts put the identity of the rock beyond doubt.

A recrystallised quartzite containing ferruginous
cherts including banded iron cherts as clasts; probably
the latter are the fibrous laths which were noted in
the field notes.

Corraberra Sandstone with derived Whyalla Sandstone

material as round lithic fragments and some spherical
quartz rock fragments.

As__.

===== page 9 (ocr)
000192

 

A. micaceous arenite, possibly Tregolana Shale. p35

Quartz (flat grey or white colour, angular to
rounded grains).

Carbonate (Dark grey, lightly speckled grey and
white grains. Where limonite stained, the
grains are almost uniform black).

Limonite (black).

Sericite and chlorite (speckled grey and white
patches or books of ragged white grains).

Crossed nicols Magnification X 105

 

 

 

 

‘

 

7

ues eta

 

 

|
i

===== page 10 (ocr)
. 800193

P 65A The specimen resembles both Whyalla and Corraberra
Sandstone. With an abundance of Gherty lithic grains,
and few heavy mineral grains it is similar to Whyalla
Sandstone; but is like Corraberra Sandstone with an
appreciable number of quartz grains which are somewhat
flattened. Generally there are some resemblance in

quartz fabric to Corraberra Sandstone, specimen A 4223,
Mt. Gunson.

P 66 Looks to be transitional between Corraberra Sandstone
and Whyalla Sandstone but with appreciable numbers of
flat quartz grains and heavy minerals present, the rock
is described as Corraberra Sandstone with derived
Whyalla material (large spherical quartz grains and
other large rounded mineral grains).

P 67 Pandurra Formation resembling Pandurra Quartzite from
some Mt. Gunson Main Open Cut specimens of angular to
subangular quartz erratics in a fine quartz matrix.

3. MICROSCOPICAL INVESTIGATION

P35 3: Flaggy, micaceous siltstone; from 'Pandurra!' ?
Tregolana Shale (Figure 1).

A sericitic siltstone with banding emphasised by
limonite staining. In thin-section the rock consists of
long fibrous sericite laths as aggregates and short-staple
laths in books which are unoriented parallel growths,
alternating with anhedral quartz (approx. 0.08 mm) which
is fairly even-grained, chlorite and patchy limonite as
minute granules which arémainly intergrown with the
micaceous minerals; and a little granular carbonate.

es

===== page 11 (ocr)
P 39

. 000194

Diagenetic recrystallisation of quartz has resulted in
angular to subangular grains and mosaic patches.
Similarly, sericite occurs in pockets and is inter-
stitial to patchy quartz mosaics. Patchy anhedral
albite-twinned albite plagioclase grains of similar
grain size to quartz mosaics are seen.

Modal mineral percent volume composition :-

Quartz 79
Sericite 10
Chlorite 1
Carbonate 2
Albite 1
Limonite 7

There are similarities in composition with A4239
(DH 3-6-2D, 5.0 m), Mystery Area, Mt. Gunson, Tregolana,
Shale; the rock (P 35) is however coarse grained with a
median quartz of sandstone grain size (Pettijohn, Ref. 3).
No resemblance to P 6B specimen from Pandurra, also
thought to be Tregolana Shale, was noted.

The rock could be described as a micaceous arenite
(Ref. 4) with a similar mineral composition to some
Tregolana Shale specimens examined.

: Ironstone (conglomeratic). Anomalous copper.

In hand specimen the rock has the superficial
appearance of a lateritic surface deposit.

In thin section, the rock consists of about 70
volume percent spherical quartz mineral grains and minor
quartz rock fragments, varying between 0.05 and 6.0 mm,
median 0.5 mm. Some round ferruginous cherts are also
seen and the larger rock fragments may be of irregular
Pandurra Quartzite with subangular constituent quartz

A/...

===== page 12 (ocr)
 

Figure 2

 

000195

 

A probable ferruginous variety of Whyalla Sandstone. P39A.

Quartz mineral grains (flat grey.and white colour)
are rounded or subangular,.

Quartz rock fragments (alternating grey and white
areas) vary from rounded to angular forms.

Ghert (speckled grey and white). One grain occurs
near left bottom corner.

Clay mineral with associated limonite (dark back~
ground). :

Crossed nicols Magnification X 14

 

ry
J

 

 

 

‘

LS L2

Beacec

 

 

===== page 13 (ocr)
P 39A

. 800196

grains and a cherty cement. The rock matrix is entirely
of limonite. The proportion of cherts (about half of
these are ferruginous) is 2 to 3 volume percent. The

rock is possibly -a ferruginous variety of Whyalla Sandstone
where the original clay matrix has been replaced by iron
from percolating solutions.

oy

Whyalla Sandstone; ? basal conglomerate; silicified
from 'Illeroo' (Figure 2).

The hand specimen shows mainly round quartz grains
in a white clay matrix. Many specks of atacamite (?) occur
at one end of the specimen.

The thin-section indicates rather more than half
the larger grains (0.5 mm +) to be rounded; the remainder
are subangular or a combination of subangular and rounded
forms. More than half of the larger quartz grains are ,
mineral grains. Angular quartz-gneiss grains occur (2
volume percent). Rounded cherts which are not ferruginous
(vary between 0.5 to 1.0 mm), are present to 1 volume
percent. Smaller quartz grains (<0.5 mm) are mainly
mineral grains and are subangular. The matrix consists
of fine chert and patchy limonite. The chert has made
inroads on and has replaced some quartz grains along
fractures or along margins of the grains. Submérged and
almost obscured in the cherty matrix are seen some ferrugi-
nous rounded cherts and volcanic tachylyte with some
fragments containing abundant limonite pseudomorphs of
magnetite; the volcanic and ferruginous cherts total to
possibly 3 volume percent.

Rounding of many quartz grains, presence of
ferruginous cherts including volcanic fragments suggests
this rock to be Whyalla Sandstone. Feldspar is apparently
absent, and the rock appears to be completely silicified,
although some 'cherts' contain sericitic material.

Vs

===== page 14 (ocr)
P 40

— P 41A

. 000197

: Sandstone, Whyalla or Corraberra ? From Illeroo.

Bleached-looking sandstone with clay matrix (?)
and traces of atacamite as greenish flakes which dissolve
slowly in 1:1 hydrochloric acid.

There is a tendency for two generations of quartz
grain-size to occur. The larger grains are mainly rounded
and subangular with appreciable flat grains with rounded
corners (overall variation 0.24 to 0.72 mm). These are
nearly all quartz grains and there are few rock fragments.
The smaller size mineral grain population is more sub-
angular than round and varies mainly between 0.08 and 0.20
mm of quartz mineral grains, ferruginous cherts, volcanic
‘cherts', and fresh feldspar (microline > plagioclase).
Illite occurs interstitially as a film between quartz
grains and in some vugs.

The chert, (mainly micaceous/ferruginous) including
silicified volcanic fragments, is about 7 volume percent of
the rock. Albite andmicrocline occur together at about 1
volume percent. Bundles of greenish biotite and squat blue-
green tourmaline (approx. 0.1 x 0.05 mm) are present as
minor quantities. Possible monazite is scattered around
the section as squat yellow sections; also scattered
magnetite euhedra, blue-green tourmaline and zircon. The
heavy minerals total just over 1 volume percent,

Appreciable flattened quartz grains, abundant

micaceous chert and heavy mineral content are factors which
classify this rock as Corraberra Sandstone.

3 Sandstone similar to P 40, from Lincoln Gap.

Pale sandstone with a pebble band of spherical
quartz grains. .

as

===== page 15 (ocr)
_ PB 42

200198

The main sandstone consists of near spherical
to flat and subangular quartz grains 0.2 to 1.0 mn,
coarser chert grains 1.0 to 3.0 mm, mainly ferruginous
and micaceous (with limonite as homogeneous specks in
chert and fine mica matrix). The larger grains occur in
a fine subangular quartz (approx. 0. 1 mm) matrix. The
abundance of ferruginous/micaceous chert (5 volume percent
of section), two populations of clastics and roundness of
some of the larger quartz grains, (Whyalla Sandstone; and
flatness of many quartz grains and appreciable detrital
rutile, zircon and tourmaline to about 1 percent, (Corra-
berra Sandstone); suggest this rock to be Corraberra
Sandstone with derived Whyalla Sandstone material. Narrow
channels between all quartz grains contain kaolinite flakes
with rather less illite totalling to about 10 volume
percent.

A fine grain sandstone with 10 volume percent
quartz (largely mineral grains, some rock fragments) as
coarse clastic material.

The pebble band is a sediment horizon in the rock
consisting of large round quartz rock fragments and chert
varying between 0.5 and 4.0 mm.

: Whyalla Sandstone, basal, silicified.

A pale sandstone of rounded quartz grains, moderate
limonite-stained matrix and prominent iron-stained chert
grains.

In thin section the quartz grains are seen to he
somewhat rounded although secondary silicification has
given some originally round grains a-subangular shape, the
quartz grains together forming quartz mosaics. Quartz
grain size varies from 0.05 to 1.3 mm though most grains
(including chert), approximate to median grain: size of.

OL aes

===== page 16 (ocr)
P 43

. 000199

0.6 mm. Carbonate seems to be replacing fine chert as

the matrix (approx. 7 volume percent) between the quartz

and primary chert grains. Ferruginous primary chert

corresponds to 3 volume percent of rock. The rock is

Whyalla Sandstone with sparse carbonate and chert matrix.
a

3 Pandurra Formation Quartzite with regolith.

Bouleler-
Under low power microscopy the rock appears to
be an irregular Pandurra Quartzite with pinkish quartz,
clay matrix and 'regolith' consisting of rounded quartz

grains with limonite cement.

In thin-section is seen no distinct boundary
contact between the 'regolith' of coarser rounded quartz
mineral grains (to 2.5 mm but variable and median 0.6 mm)
and rock fragments and chert (to 3 mm); with a finer
grained zone of mainly quartz mineral grains (approx. 0.15
mm but up to 2 mm) surrounding the 'regolith'. Below the
regolith in the main host rock, banding of fine quartz
grains (approx 0.2 mm) and unsorted (0.3 to 2 mm) bands
are seen. ‘The difference in cementing material is noted,
that of the 'regolith' being mainly amorphous limonite
and that of the host quartzite being largely silica but
with occasional pockets of kaolinite platelets of similar
size to the surrounding quartz grains. The quartz grains
of the host quartzite are subangular and fit together as
mosaics due to the normal formation of quartz overgrowths.

Within the 'regolith' the grains are also locally
silicified and form mosaics, though blind channels and
pockets of limonite occur and more than half of the grains
show a degree of roundness. Where present the subangular
grains were rounded before silicification as indicated by
internal trains of fluid inclusions and limonite particles.
Some small rounded cherts (¢1 volume percent of the
'regolith') ~ not ferruginous,are also seen.

No heavy minerals are seen.

10/...

===== page 17 (ocr)
P 44

 

- 10--

060200

Lack of distinct boundaries between the main
rock and 'regolith' shows the latter to have been a
possible unconsolidated aggregate of quartz held to-
gether by limonitic-mud, the resulting mud-ball being
washed into the sedimentary environment by flood waters.

No regolith ‘sensu stricto' is identifiable.

The host rock is identified as Pandurra Quartzite. .

: Silcrete from Whyalla Sandstone, basal section

Some round quartz mineral grains are seen but
the specimen consists mainly of subangular to angular
chalcedonic fragments in a siliceous matrix as seen in
hand specimen.

In thin-section each fragment of chalcedony

(0.1 to 4,0 mm) consists mainly of aggregates of radial

structures of silica; otherwise of cherty aggregates
with quartz fragments. Rounded and subangular quartz
mineral grains and rock fragments (median 1. 8 mm) and
fewer subangular grains, one containing a cherty volcanic
fragment of tachylitic glass are seen. Ferruginous
cherts as seen normally in Whyalla Sandstone are also

present.

Ratio of rounded quartz to grains showing some
angularity is about 1:3.

Chalcedony is more abundant than fine chert and
the ratio of round grains to grains of angular aspects
here is 1:20.

14s

===== page 18 (ocr)
Figure 3

 

000201

 

Mainly cherty gravel with some Whyalla Sandstone
pebbles (one is shown at centre of photo-
graph). P45

Quartz grains (grey, white and black).

Chert grains (speckled or mottled, grey, white or
dark).

Left bottom of photograph is part of quartz rock
fragment. .

Left top of photograph and top centre are part of
limonitic cherty grains.

Crossed nicols Magnification X 15

i

 

J

 

===== page 19 (ocr)
 

|
wl

 

Pp 45

-1l1 -)

000202

Modal mineral composition :-

‘

Quartz mineral grains - 9
Quartz rock fragments 2 .

Chalcedony (much fragmented in
places) 13
Chert (ferruginous and volcanic) 6

43 s

Siliceous matrix oa 70

The matrix is amorphous-cherty with scattered

limonite particles.

The presence of some ferruginous chert, volcanic
chert and round quartz show an affinity with normal Whyalla
Sandstone. The presence of abundant silica-cement matrix
and abundant fragmental chalcedony shows this rock to be a
duricrust of mixed origin, with a proportion of Whyalla

Sandstone grains. >

3 Gravel, believed to be basal Whyalla Sandstone Unit.
(Figure 3). Sample finer grained than usual. Compare
with P 39A.

2
Geer ¥

ca

 

ie
flew: opm eagepet off as

The pebbles (approx. 6 mm diameter) are largely
of chert or rounded quartz rock fragments with few quartz
mineral grains. The cherts are round, subangular and
flat with round edges. About half the chert grains are
typical Whyalla ferruginous cherts and some contain
devitrified volcanic glass and silicified feldspathic
matter.

Composite percentage :~
volume percent

Quartz mineral grains 2
Quartz rock fragments . 25 :
Clear chert 21 /
Ferruginous cherts , 33
"Volcanic! cherts 13
Shale (showing bedding and fine quartz

“ particles) 6

, 12/0.

===== page 20 (ocr)
 

 

|

4
:

 

         

Figure 4

Corraberra Sandstone. p46

Quartz grains (flat grey and white colours) are
subangular or flat shaped.

Micaceous and cherty matrix (speckled black and " :
white areas between quartz grains).

Volcanic cherts (also speckled black and white
but are darker grains).

Microcline grain (left of centre, twinned).

 

 

Crossed nicols Magnification X 104

===== page 21 (ocr)
fn 12 —

. 000204

In specimen P 39A most clasts are quartz mineral
grains with fewer rock fragments.and more than half these
grains are rounded. In P 45 about two-thirds of the
'clasts' are chert. The ferruginous cherts and volcanic
cherts show some resemblance to those seen in P 39A,

If P 45 is derived from the Whyalla Sandstone then
there has been some natural physical differentiation of
liberated particles to give a chert-rich concentrate at
point of sampling. However, there is no doubt that many
of these pebbles come from a similar source to Whyalla
Sandstone.

: . Whyalla Sandstone, overlying Gawler Volcanics (Figure 4)

A very fine-grained sandstone with carbonate
cement and containing patchy oxide-copper mineralisation.

In thin-section the quartz grains are more or less
equigranular, subangular with an abundance of flat grains

.(0.05 to 0.24, median 0.16 mm) and many show replacement of

grain margins by the carbonate matrix. In fact the matrix
is largely brownish chloritic clay with patchy illite and
carbonate. The chloritic clay platelets commonly occupy
the centres of vugs; illite and carbonate, mixed or
separately occupy narrow or broad zones flanking the quartz.
grains; however chloritic clay platelets also flank quartz
grains locally. Chloritic clay is associated with
leucoxene which occurs as granule aggregates. Occasional
grains of fresh albite (one percent of rock) and a little
limonitised magnetite are seen as scarce components; also
large (0.3 x 0.8 mm) flakes of muscovite; less than one
percent volume of rock of cherty tachylyte; and large

(0.10 mm) chunky tourmaline (olive green) grains. The
abundance of chloritic clay, scattered leucoxene aggregates,
and feldspar and tachylitic chert fragments may indicate
derivation of matrix from an igneous rock’ source.

13/2.

===== page 22 (ocr)
P 48

- 13.

. 009205

Modal composition of rock :~
Volume percent

Quartz . 66
Chert (including much micaceous chert) 2
Volcanic fragments 1
Carbonate 3
Chloritic clay 20
I1lite/muscovite 5
Leucoxene 2
Plagioclase feldspar 1
Tourmaline, topaz and sphene <1

The fine grain, predominance of equigranular
quartz including many flattened grains scattered opaques
and appreciable heavy minerals make this rock more akin
to Corraberra Sandstone (comparable with specimen A4224,
Mt. Gunson).

3 Pandurra Formation, from below the pre-Marinoan zone
of silicification.

in hand specimen, subangular grains of quartz are
moderately sorted, with pebbles several millimetres diameter
forming the 'bottom' end of the specimen. Malachite is
seen as traces in the interstices of finer sizes of quartz
grains.

Thin-section shows very little variation between
mainly quartz mineral grains which are largely subangular
to sub-rounded and form a mosaic. The variation in grain
size is between 0.1 and 1.0 mm with a median grain size
of 0.3 mm. At the coarser pebbly end of the section the
grain size abruptly rises to 3.5 mm consisting of rounded
and flattened grains. Those grains between 1.2 and 3.5 mm
constitute about 30 volume percent of grains present at
the pebbly end. The remainder of grains present are of
similar size range to quartz grains at the finer end. Thus,
the larger quartz grains may be considered as erratics..

VAs

===== page 23 (ocr)
P 49

“eda 909208

The cement between the tightly fitting quartz
grains was originally a very fine parting of limonite,
(27 5p thick) which because of secondary silicification
has retreated behind later diagenetic quartz grain
boundaries in many places. Fine subangular quartz grains
(approx. 30/) as groups between the larger grains
(0.1 mm and greater) only locally appear to be absorbed
into the larger neighbouring quartz grains by encroaching
silicification. No cherts are seen but only occasional
quartz rock fragments, some of which contain trains of
fluid inclusions.

The rounding of subangular quartz grains by
silicification, moderate to poor sorting, with the
presence of some erratic grains at. 'bottom' of the
section, scarcity of both ferruginous cherts
and heavy minerals are typical of Pandurra Formation
rocks generally.

z Silcreted gravel or conglomerate

Purple, pink, white and colourless, rounded to
subangular, quartzose pebbles and flattened purple shale
grains from a fraction of a millimetre to several milli-
metres in size in a white silica matrix.

Many of the larger grains of quartz mineral, chert
grains (clear and ferruginous) and rock fragments (0.7 to
3.0 mm) are quite spherical and similar to those seen in
Whyalla Sandstone. Other grains, (about half of larger
grains, i.e. + 0.5 mm} are subangular. One large quartz
rock fragment consists of cemented grains many of which are
near spherical (0.2 to 1.0 mm), the composite grain being
subangular and 10 mm maximum diameter. One large subangular
2.5 mm grain of supposed silicified variolitic basalt is
seen. About 3 volume percent of the rock consists of
ferruginous cherts of very variable size and degree of |
roundness, as commonly seen in Whyalla Sandstone are present.

15/...

===== page 24 (ocr)
 

 

000207

 

 

Figure 5

Whyalla Sandstone with Pandurra Quartzite pebble
inclusion, P49A. .

The ‘'erratic' (centre of photograph and similar
to other erratics in the section) is
cherty and cannot positively be identified
as a fragment of Pandurra Quartzite.

Crossed nicols Magnification X 14

precwse

.
'
L

 

===== page 25 (ocr)
P 494

*215 -

. 009203

The fine- matrix of 20 volume percent of rock consists

of small angular quartz grains (approx. 0.08 mm) of fairly
even grain which are very similar to the silt-size matrix
as seen in many Whyalla Sandstone specimens. The rock
consists of much derived Whyalla Sandstone material with
equally abundant coarse rock material derived from other
(Pandurra Formation ?) sources. A secondary silicified
gravel derived from several sedimentary sources some of
which are noted above.

3 Whyalla Sandstone silicified and containing Pandurra
Pebbles (Figure 5).

A fine even-grained pink quartzite with large
pebble erratics.

In thin-section the quartz grains are not so even-
grained as they appear in hand specimen. However many
grains show some internal rounding of a nucleus demarcated
by limonite particle inclusions before silicification set-
in. Grain size of mainly quartz mineral grains varies
between 0.1 and 1.3 mm with median size around 0.4 mm.
Overgrowths of quartz have produced an almost entirely
quartz mosaic, the originally rounded nature of grains
being shown by included fine particles as described above.
The typical ferruginous cherts of Whyalla Sandstone and
some clear chert grains are rounded to subangular and of
median quartz grain size. Some recrystallisation of part
of chert is noted in some cases. The cherts occur to about
2 percent of microscope field. Brownish, rounded tourmaline
grains (approx. 0.048 mm) occur as inclusions in quartz
overgrowths.

Large erratics of ‘Pandurra Quartzite in the rock
are rounded, patchily faintly ferruginous recrystallised
chert, 20 mm and 3 mm in size; also a more ferruginous
fine chert grain is somewhat subangular and 6 mm in size.

16/...

===== page 26 (ocr)
Figure 6

&
a
So
w

2
wo

 

 

Whyalla Sandstone. P5OB....

Quartz (flat white and various shades of grey colour)
eccurs in roughly two population distributions
of large and small grains.

Cherts (speckled or mottled black and white).

Clay minerals as matrix (fine stipple).

Crossed nicols Magnification X 14

 

 

===== page 27 (ocr)
aad

ica

 

 

P 50B

f.16 -

009210

A silicified but sharp boundary between the erratics
and main quartzite is noted.

Evidence for identification of the rock as
Whyalla Sandstone, which has since been silicified, are
the original roundness of quartz grains, the relatively
even grained size of quartz, and the presence of
ferruginous cherts of similar grain size to the quartz
grains. The large erratics are not obviously derived
from the Pandurra Formation but this is the most likely
source.

: Looks like Pandurra Formation, outcrops like
Whyalla Sandstone.

In hand- specimen are seen very irregular quartz
grains as subangular to angular grains, abundant clay
matrix, local oxide copper (probably traces of malachite).

In thin-section the quartz grains are seen to be
not so irregular in grain shapes or sizes. Many grains

-of quartz rock and quartz mineral are perfectly spherical

to near spherical or flat-rounded; this comprises rather
more than half the grains present, both small and large.
Grain size variation is 0.2 to 3.5 mm. There are, as in
normal Whyalla Sandstone, roughly two populations of
quartz grains; small, evenly subangular and rounded
varying between 0.2 and 0.5 mm, median 0.3 mm; large,

1 to 3.5 mm, some rounded but many rounded-subangular or
flattened in shape with a ratio 2:3 rock fragments to
mineral grains and comprising about 5 percent of the rock.
The larger grains do show a tendency to concentrate in
some layers (bedding planes). Ferruginous cherts, and some
clear chert grains, subangular to rounded occur to 1 to 2
volume percent of the rock averaging, 0.3 mm and are
present. interstitial with the finer quartz grains.

17/.c6

===== page 28 (ocr)
00211 7

 

 

Figure 7 wy
Corruburra Sandstone. P51 ul
Many grains of quartz have a flat shape with

 

rounded corners,
Micaceous cherts, dark or flecked/speckled black

 

and white grains (See centre of photograph).
Illite (white and grey flakes) form fine matrix of
narrow channels between quartz and chert

 

grains,

;
ie
’ Crossed nicols Magnification x 105 Ms

===== page 29 (ocr)
P 51

f.417-

, 000212

‘Volcanic! (devitrified glass) sericitic cherts are
present but are rare. Some replacement of quartz by
Opaque mineral is noted.

The matrix is of mainly fine illite with some
coarse sericitic shreds and kaolinite patches overall
to 25 volume percent of the rock. The kaolinite patches
may be the result of clay mineral replacement of chert.

The evidence of a degree of roundness of many
quartz grains, evidence of two quartz population
distributions, presence of appreciable ferruginous cherts
and rare volcanic fragments would suggest this to be

Whyalla Sandstone.

3 Sandstone, (Whyalla or Corraberra ?) from Tent Hiil
crater. Pale sandstone shows a sharp contact between
fine and medium grained sandstone (Figure 7).

An even grained sandstone of rounded (not spherical)
subangular and flattened quartz grains varying between 0.048
to 0.5 mm, median 0.1 mm. Many grains show strain with
Bohm lamellae and most grains are quartz mineral grains.
Micaceous cherts are more common than ferruginous cherts,
are of similar grain size to median quartz and are rounded
to subangular to 5 volume percent of the rock. Clay
mineral occurs up to 3 volume percent as interstitial
mineral in narrow channels between grains, but the rock
cement is to a great extent silicified, though sutured
boundaries between quartz grains are rare. Traces of
glauconite i.e. clay,as rounded speckled green grains are
seen, also occasional large (approx. 0.1 mm) rounded green
tourmaline grains with yellow-green overgrowths. Aggregates
of leucoxene and some magnetite are seen distributed
throughout to a total of 3 volume percent.

18/...

===== page 30 (ocr)
P.51B

f
-18-.

000218

Overgrowths on quartz grains appear to be slight,
following evenly the original quartz grain margins.
These are easily detectable by opaque particle inclusions
which indicate original grain shape.

Occasional microcline grains are seen of oblong
grain shape and size ranges are similar to those of the
quartz grains.

The abundance of strained quartz and of flat-
round rather than spherical to near-spherical quartz
grains, of micaceous cherts and appreciable leucoxene
suggest this rock is a member of the Corraberra Sandstone
rock unit.

Pandurra Formation. Pink quartzite. Boulder in
Whyalla Sandstone.

Pink irregular quartzite with some pale erratic
grains. Patchy clay interstices but mainly silicified.
Traces of oxide copper mineralisation.

In thin-section the rock is seen to be a poorly
sorted quartzite of mainly quartz mineral grains, minor
quartz rock fragments (including quartz gneiss fragments)
and some clear cherts, the latter grains occurring to
around 2 volume percent. Predominantly large subangular
and with fewer rounded quartz mineral grains and rock
fragments (approx. 2 mm in size) occur to about 3 volume
percent of the rock. The remaining grains are mainly
quartz mineral grains from 0.1 to 1.2 mm. median 0.3 mm
and a poorly-sorted banding of mainly fine grains with
large erratics and alternatively mainly coarse with much
interstitial fine quartz are seen. The rock consists
largely of fused sutured quartz mosaics although cherty
material in the interstices and in vugs and a little clay
mineral in blind channels do occur.

Heavy minerals and feldspar are lacking.

saat

===== page 31 (ocr)
P 52

f.19 -

> 000214

The poor sorting, lack of ferruginous cherts,
subangularity of most grains and lack of heavy minerals
favour classifying the rock as Pandurra Quartzite.

2?

Woocalla Dolomite. Manganiferous.

Fine cream-coloured rock with numerous small vugs.
Manganese dioxide has apparently deposited (?) along sub-
parallel fractures or joints in the rocks and has diffused °
along microfractures flanking the major joints.

Thin-section shows fine-grain dolomite with
moderate (3 volume percent) goethite depositing largely
as spheres (approx. 54) within fine dolomite grains.
Possibly some of the goethite is pseudomorphing original
syngenetic pyrite (?). The dolomite which is seen as
irregular grains of very variable size (to 0.026 mm) is
fairly clear except where deposited manganese dioxide
occurs in the dolomite as irregular lenticles and masses
commonly intergrown with goethite although as mentioned
above, most goethite occurs separately scattered through

the dolomite.

It would appear that both MnO, and goethite were
the product of weathering of dolomite containing appreciable
iron and manganese in solid solution. Upon weathering both
elements were leached and became oxidised, the iron
precipitating first in the dolomite followed by manganese
Thus the diffuse goethite
seen beyond and around manganese in fractures is precipi-
but the goethite

spheres which occur scattered throughout the rock may

which precipitated in fractures.
tated iron extracted from dolomite;
possibly be pyrite pseudomorphs.

No organic algal structures are seen.

20/..6

===== page 32 (ocr)
Figure 8

 

R00219

 

Whyalla Sandstone with abundant volcanic clasts, P53

Quartz of Whyalla Sandstone (flat grey and white
colours) often shows primary rounded centres
with subangular quartz overgrowths which
together form mosaics.

Volcanic clasts are mainly rounded devitrified
glass as cherty masses (speckled black and
white or mainly dark masses in photograph).

Crossed nicols Magnification X 16

 

 

 

===== page 33 (ocr)
P 53

f .
- 20+.

. 000216

Woocalla Dolomite where weathered, quite often
shows oxidation of ‘'dolomite' manganese, although as
previously seen by the writer it occurs more diffuse
associated with goethite and seems to occur towards the
bottom of the stratigraphic unit.

3 Whyalla Sandstone containing chips of Gawler
Volcanics (Figure 8)

A spongy looking pinkish quartzite with irregular
inclusions of limonitised fine-grained rock.

In thin-section the quartz grains are presently
irregular in size and subangular due in some cases to
quartz overgrowths on more rounded grains. The size
variation is 0.1 to 1.3 mm, median 0.2 mm. Some large
grains of quartz are quite subangular and this is fairly
unusual for Whyalla Sandstone as seen by the writer.
However most grains (> 80 volume percent of quartz grains
present) which now have quartz overgrowths, show by
internal narrow elliptical trains of hematite particles
that they were to some extent rounded before silicification.
The quartz grains which were originally mainly mineral
grains constitute 85 volume percent of the rock and with
associated volcanic clasts, form a tight silicified mosaic.
The remaining 15.percent of the rock consists of variable
size (to several mms) and variable shape ferruginous cherts,
clear cherts, micaceous cherts and cherty grains with micro-
lites (variolitic) texture and devitrified palagonite
always accompanied by abundant limonite. other grains
contain chertified feldspar phenocrysts in a devitrified
glassy mass of porphyrite or andesite? The latter are
derived fragments from the Gawler Volcanics. Less than 1
percent of rounded zircons (approx. 0.048 mm in size) are
present.

21/..-

===== page 34 (ocr)
56

f. 21 -

: 900217

A poorly sorted quartzite with some rounding
shown by primary nuclei of quartz grains. However the
quartzite fabric. is somewhat similar to that seen in
A4255 (DH 3-4-3D, 6.1 m), Whyalla Sandstone from the Main
Open Cut area (Ref. 5). This rock has been highly silici-
fied but does not contain as much cherty material.

A Whyalla Sandstone with abundant volcanic clasts.

3 Whyalla Sandstone, silicified.

Mainly rounded to near spherical quartz grains
showing frosted and some grooved surfaces with a few large
angular grains and many ferruginous cherty grains, all in
a white fine-grained interstitial matrix. ,

The Whyalla Sandstone quartz grains in thin-section
are mainly mineral grains (approx. only 1 percent quartz
rock fragments are present) and are quite spherical, varying
between 0,2 and 1.2 mm, median 0.4 mm, associated with
subangular to rounded ferruginous volcanic chert grains of
similar size range occurring to 10 volume percent of the
rock. The interstices (5 volume percent of rock) consists
of fractured chert fragments cemented by secondary quartz
(also chert) associated with some clay mineral to neighbouring
quartz grains. Many of the ferruginous chert gtains contain
devitrified glassy matter, some variolitic structures and
are possibly basaltic. One large round greenish tourmaline
(0.4 mm) shows fracture and fill with chert. Opaque oxides
occur as magnetite grains in groups inside the volcanic
cherts and occasionally within quartz overgrowths on primary
quartz grains.

Whyalla Sandstone with abundant volcanic cherty
clasts and cherty/clay interstitial material which is mainly
in vugs. : .

22/...

===== page 35 (ocr)
- 22 -.

000218

P 57A : Silicified conglomerate; overlies Pandurra Formation.

P 58

Believed to have undergone pre-Marinoan silicification
along with upper section of the Pandurra Formation.

A silicified ‘conglomerate! of large and small
grains in two distinct population distributions.

Thin-section shows large round quartz rock
fragments and chert from 1 to 7 mms (about 20 volume
percent of the rock) in a more subangular matrix of
smaller quartz grains with fewer rock fragments and clear
chert grains (overall 0.05 to 0.6 mm, median 0.3 mm, many
grains are of approximately median size). The small quartz
grains show the usual elliptical trains of hematite particles
just within the grain boundaries to indicate more rounded
primary quartz. Secondary silicification has welded the
whole mass of quartz grains into sutured quartz mosaics.
Occasional (<1 volume percent of rock) volcanic rock grains
of devitrified glass containing decussate patterns of micro-
lites are observed. The large round conglomerate fragments
which are quartz rock fragments show a similar complete
silicification of constituent grains into mosaics.

- The rudaceous element is largely of water-worn
quartz and some chert grains derived from the Pandurra
Quartzite. Absence of heavy minerals, ferruginous chert
and aeolian quartz would suggest a Pandurra Formation
origin for much of the rock material. A pebbly sand
(Ref. 3) type of conglomerate which was subsequently
silicified.

3 Pandurra Formation grit. Unsilicified.

A poorly sorted sandstone of mainly
subangular quartz grains and rock fragments. Clay matrix.

23/ e066

===== page 36 (ocr)
f— 23 -

000219

Thin-section shows many of the larger quartz
grains to be rounded and are commonly perfectly oval in
section. These grains are mainly quartz mineral. The
quartz mineral grains, quartz rock fragments and clear
chert are of similar size (1.5 to 2 mm). Many of the
larger quartz mineral grains have rounded primary nuclei
and silicification has made the grains more angular.

The smaller grains in the rock vary mostly from
0.1 to 1.0 mm, are too variable to obtain median value;
they are more rounded (some near spherical) than subangular.

Overall, the modal volume percent of mineral
constituents are :-

Quartz mineral grains 90

Quartz rock fragments
Clear chert clasts (large grains) 2
Ferruginous rounded volcanic chert grains

. (small grains) 1
Kaolinite matrix 2

The rock is mainly silicified into mosaics and
clay mineral occurs only in vugs.

The rock bears a passable resemblance to Whyalla
Sandstone A4255 (Open Cut) in original shapes of quartz
grains before and after silicification to produce
silicified mosaics. However compared with other thin-
sections of Whyalla Sandstone from the Gunson area but
principally from the Pandurra area the grains are still
overall mainly subangular or (~ 80 volume percent of
grains present) taking into consideration quartz overgrowths,
and the ferruginous cherts are present in very. minor
quantities.

The rock is silicified Pandurra Formation but is a
borderline transition type to Whyalla Sandstone.

24/200

===== page 37 (ocr)
660220 ‘|

4

a aaa ui

|

 

  

Whyalla Sandstone - silicified P60 J
Many subangular quartz grains are present but a
also appreciable rounded grains remain. ;

Few silicified grains show opaque or fluid
inclusion trains.

Cherts are grey and white and stippled black
and white (See centre near bottom margin
and near top centre of photograph).

Interstitial grey and white flakes are kaolinite,

 

speckled grey and white are chert.

Crossed nicols Magnification X 101 wd

===== page 38 (ocr)
 

 

|
|

 

P 60

f. 24 -

> 000221

3 Whyalla Sandstone. Silicified lithic sandstone
(Figure 9)

Many rounded quartz grains with frosted surfaces
in a matrix of finer more angular grains and clay.

Thin-section shows banding by the larger quartz
and chert (ferruginous and clear) grains which are rounded
(near spherical in some grains) or are flattened grains with
rounded corners (0.2 to 1.5 mm) with interstitial finer
quartz grains (0.02 to 0.19 mm). These bands alternate with
those of predominantly small subangular quartz grains (also
0.02 to 0.19 mm) with scattered large erratics of round
larger quartz grains. Other bands of equigranular quartz
(0.2 to 0.4 mm) many rounded, few subangular grains occur
between the coarse and fine bands described. Some rough
sorting of grains has therefore taken place. The overall
percentage of oval to near spherical grains in the section
is probably around 20 volume percent but is much higher
among the bands of largest quartz grains. The overall
percentage of ferruginous chert grains is around 2 volume
percent with some grains consisting of devitrified “pala-
gonite glass. Some rounded topaz and less brownish and
green tourmaline occur, both minerals are around 0.08 mm
in size and with the occurrence of sporadic opaque minerals
of similar size make up about 1 volume percent of the rock.
The toumaline is quite angular and appears to have suffered
very little attrition. The rock has been largely silicified
into mosaics but there are blind interstitial channels
containing chert and kaolinite.

A silicified non-standard Whyalla Sandstone. The

abundance of volcanic cherts and spherical large quartz
grains puts the identity beyond doubt.

25/..-

===== page 39 (ocr)
600222

 

Figure 10

Corruburra Sandstone with much derived Whyalla
Sandstone material. P65

Many quartz grains (flat white and grey colours)
show a fair degree of rounding and quite
a number are of somewhat flattened
appearance.

Volcanic cherty fragments (left of centre); clear
chert (near left bottom corner).

Otherwise opaque leucoxene and flakey mica in
interstices. Heavy minerals other than
lencoxene are present but do not show up
on photograph,

Crossed nicols Magnification X 103

 

 

 

:
j
i

===== page 40 (ocr)
P 61

P 65

- 25 -

3 Silcrete contains fibrous laths.

Rounded quartz grains in a fine white matrix
but large clasts of glassy volcanic material also occurs.

The quartzite consists largely of rounded quartz
grains, even polygonal grains (stress relief during
silicification ?), quartz replaced cherts and some
ferruginous chert grains, all grains being between 0.16
and 0.80 mm, median 0.3 mm. Internal opaque mineral trains.
show that original quartz grains before silicification were
very much more angular than they are now. Where not welded
together at mutual boundaries, fine slivers of chert are
seen to be part of the rock cement.

Ferruginous banded chert (several millimetres in
length and width) form most of the large clasts. However,
one clast is of quartzite with similar constituent. quartz
grain sizes to those in the matrix quartzite but having a
ferruginous cherty cement between the quartz grains and
also containing a few ferruginous and clear chert grains
of similar grain size to the constituent quartz grains. One
volcanic chert several millimetres in size contains chert
and ferruginous matter which has filled amygdules (7?) and
replaced feldspar (?) laths; all in a ferruginous cherty
matrix (Gawler Volcanics ?).

A recrystallised quartzite containing cherty
sediments and volcanic fragments.

Fibrous laths are of fine ferruginous cherty

material.
: ? Whyalla Sandstone. Clay-rich layers similar to P40,
P 41A. Fine white quartzite with round lithic fragments

as inclusions. (Figure 10).

Rounded, flat with rounded corners and subangular
grains 0.03 to 1 mm, mediz. 0.08 mm are poorly sorted and

9A/ =.

===== page 41 (ocr)
- 26 -

° 000224

are mainly quartz mineral grains with appreciable
ferruginous cherts. The flattened grains among both

the smaller and larger grains are present to nearly

half the total quartz grains in the section. Ferruginous
cherts and minor granophyric grains which are similar in
shape are together present to less than 1 volume percent.
Clear cherts of all sizes are rounded and occur to less
than 1 percent. Heavy minerals including leucoxene>
magnetite> zircon? tourmaline? rutile are present, total
between 1 and 2 percent. Also scattered large clasts
(0.3 to 1 mm) of spherical quartz rock fragments occur to
3 percent of grains present in most of section but grades
up to 10 percent where present in a coarser band of quartz
grains.

Clay mineral (kaolinite> illite) as fine flakes to
10 volume percent of the rock, some coarser muscovite also
occurs to less than 1 percent of rock, also a little inter
stitial carbonate,

The rock is similar to P 40 in grain size and
texture but contains no feldspar, less Ferruginous chert,
more clay and more heavy minerals.

A Corraberra Sandstone with some derived Whyalla
Sandstone material (near spherical larger quartz grains
and ferruginous lithic chert fragments).

P 65A : Whyalla Sandstone ? Similar to P 65.

A fine-grain greenish equigranular sandstone
specked with red lithic particles and white clay and black
magnetite (?).

Overall, coarser grained than P 40, 41A and 65,
(has many fewer fine grains and is more even grained than

the latter specimens).

27/06

===== page 42 (ocr)
000;

20

t

 

 

Figure 11
Corraberra Sandstone with derived Whyalla Sandstone
material ~ P66
Larger quartz grains tend to be somewhat rounded or
flat/round with smaller interstitial quartz
particles being subangular,

Fine clay mineral (black and white flecked) is a
film between quartz grains or is in vugs.

Magnetite (black). Other heavy minerals though
present are not distinguishable at this
magnification.

Crossed nicols Magnification X 14

 

J

q
;

 

 

===== page 43 (ocr)
 

P66

£27 =

oD

00226

Many quartz grains are round, near spherical, some are
subangular and fewer are flattened with round corners.
The grains vary between 0.16 and 0.80 mm, but most grains
are around the median of 0.3 mm. Similarly quartz rock
fragments, some being gneissose occur to 3 volume percent
of the rock. Rounded ferruginous cherts, some containing
silicified volcanic microlites and occasionally included
mica flakes occur to 2 to 3 volume percent and also clear
chert grains of similar size to 1 percent of rock. Clay
mineral as mainly illite with less kaolinite occupies vugs
and narrow channelways between quartz grains. Total clay
mineral is about 3 volume percent of rock.

Occasional rounded greenish tourmaline grains to
much less than 1 volume percent are the only heavy minerals
seen. Some silicification of quartz grains into mosaics
has taken place.

There is some resemblance in quartz grain shapes
to Corraberra Sandstone of Mt. Gunson, (A4223), but a
greater abundance of cherty lithic grains and fewer heavy
minerals are observed. In shapes of grains with a high
degree of rounding, lack of feldspar, the presence of
abundant volcanic chert (though finer Corraberra Sandstone
often contains an abundance of this lithological type) and
the presence of only minor heavy minerals as tourmaline, the
resemblance is therefore greater to Whyalla Sandstone.
Possibly a transition rock type?

: Sandstone (Whyalla or Corraberra). (Figure 11).

Inequigranular, rounded or rounded-flat grains and
abundant lithic particles. A white sandstone as per P 65.

A quartzite with two population distributions of
larger near spherical grains and smaller round to subangular
grains. Some.of the larger grains do show a tendency to
flatness but these are concave-convex and concave shapes as

28/24

===== page 44 (ocr)
- 28 -

000227

are commonly seen in some large Whyalla Sandstone quartz
grains. Grain size of larger quartz grains is 0.3 to 1.0
mm, smaller grains vary between 0.03 to 0.15 mm, median

0.1 mm. Ferruginous chert varies from subangular to
rounded-flat grains, vary between 0.05 and 0.5 mm and occur
to 1 to 2 volume percent. Clear cherts are not seen. A
brownish clay mineral occurs between 7 and 10 volume percent
of the section (derived from volcanic material?) and is seen
occasionally in small vugs but mainly as a film between the
quartz and chert grains. Magnetite occurs to 1 volume
percent; rounded zircon? rutile? tourmaline also makes

up to 1 percent.

Not so differentiated into two quartz size popula-
tions as A4247 (Whyalla Sandstone, Mystery area) but similar
degree of rounding of large quartz grains and similar
ferruginous chert content. Somewhat similar to P 414A,
Corraberra Sandstone in quartz grain sizes and abundance
and variety of heavy minerals. Probably Corraberra Sandstone
with derived Whyalla Sandstone material.

P67 3: Sandstone - please identify.

An irregular sandstone of large subangular quartz
grains in a fine subangular quartz grain matrix.

At one end of the section are the familiar (of
Pandurra Quartzite) large angular to subangular erratics
of quartz rock fragments which are more abundant than large
mineral grains, (varying 0.5 to 4 mm) in fine quartz (approx.
0.1 mm). Further down the section are subangular to round
quartz grains (0.3 to 0.8 mm, mostly around median 0.7 mm)
which show peripheral trains of opaque inclusions indicating
secondary silicification. Silicification has not altered
the primary shapes of quartz grains very much. Where not
‘silicified, and this is the case in areas all over the
section, limonite fills in spaces between the quartz grains

to about 2 volume percent ~f the rock, Clay mineral as

29/.26

===== page 45 (ocr)
4.

4 29 -

000228

kaolinite occupies sporadic vugs in the rock and is seen
adjoining the limonite in the interstices; also elsewhere
brownish cherty material is seen associated with Kaolinite
in the interstices. No chert grains, ferruginous or clear
are seen and no heavy minerals apart from occasional almost
fresh unworn zircon grains. Absence of feldspar, ferruginous
.cherts and near absence of heavy minerals and the angularity
of large quartz grains suggest this rock to be a member of
the Pandurra Formation. The quartz grain fabric is somewhat

similar to specimens A4252, 4254 and 4256 from the Main Open
Cut at Mount Gunson.

REFERENCES

 

1)

2)

3)

4)

5)

Pandurra Thin. Sections, I, Memo from PJC to DGT dated 4/9/73.

Petrography of Mount Gunson Sediments, Pacminex Report
PMR 195/72, October, 1972. :

Pettijohn, F.J., 1957: ‘Sedimentary Rocks', pub. by Harper &
Row, N.Y. and London. :

Williams, G., Turner, F.J., and Gilbert, C.M., 1954 ;
'Petrography', pub. by W.H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco

Pandurra Thin Sections II, Memo from DGT to PJC dated
23/10/73.

PJC/ss

