===== page 1 (text)
                DEPARTMENT     OF    MINES
                  . SOUTH    AUSTRALIA.
                                                    REP. BK. 18/119
  GENERAL GEOLOGICAL REPORT ON THE MT. GUNSON - PERNATTY
        LAGOON DISTRICT AND MINERAL DEPOSITS.


                      INTRODUCTION
        An   area of approximately 900 square miles was examined
in the course of ten days with. a view to establishing the
fundamental relationships between the mineral deposits and the
rocks and rock structures in· the area in question.         The geologi-
cal map accompanying this report shows the actual iliimits of the
reconnaissance survey which was carried out, and the inset map,
thereon, shows the loc-alities of the main mineral deposits of
the district.

             SUMMARY OF MINERAL OCCURRENCES

        The mineral deposits were found to be localized within or
adjacent to a distinctive bed of dolomitic limestone.          The
singular expression "bed" is used because only one bed or layer
of limestone was seen during the reconnaissance.          The association
of the mineral deposits with this bed of dolomitic lime-stone
may be considered to hold throughout the Mt. Gunson district,
but it may not hold a few miles outside the district where
different conditions may prevail.         The distribution of this
favourable bed of dolomitic limestone is shown on the geological
map and its limits fairly well define the area beyond which the
chances for ore are extremely unl~kely.
        The actual structural controls producing the localisation
of the ore deposits were not discovered in such a cursory e~amina
tion.   They are undoubtedly obscure and indefinite in character
on account of the relatively undisturbed nature of the sedimen-
tary rocks of the district.         Surmises as to their nature are
made later in reference to the origin of the mineral deposits.
These deposits are believed to be chiefly of epigenetic origin
and to have been formed by meteoric          waters·;M!CROFil~;i[e:/J   A

===== page 2 (text)
                          -   2   -

        The mineral deposits comprise those of copper, manganese
fluorite· and barytes, the latter two being of little economic
interest on account of their:sparse occurrence.        Copper is being
produced at the Mt. Gunson copper mine.        This mine was ecamined
in more detail and forms the subject of a separate report.
Manganese deposits are being worked on the western side of
Pernatty Lagoon about 5 miles north of Woocalla.         Reports on
these deposits have been published in Mining Review Nos. 25 and
31.

                         TOPOGRAP~



        The area is composed of isolated tablelands, interspersed
with extensive depressions occupied either by salt lakes or by
sand dunes and alluvial swamps.         The term "tableland" is used for
broad elevated area bestrewn with fragments of basement rock and
"Durricrust" material •. On the tablelands the begetation is very
scanty wi.th a marked absence of trees.        In contrast the low-lying
areas have a well developed covering of mallee trees except
around the margins o:f the s.al t     lakes.

        A f_ew high flat-topped residual hills stand out avove
the general level of the tablelands and form conspicuous features
of the landscape.       Mt. Gunson, South Oakden, North Oakden and
West ·oakden Hills are typical residual hills.        Channel Hill at
Wirrappa_Siding, on the East-West Railway line is also a residual
hill.   It is adjacent to a more closely bunched series of mesa-
like remnants of a former land surface which was situated about
500-1000 ft. above the present surface.        The process of formation
of the present flat land surface as a result of widespread degrad·
ation is well advanced.
        In this district faulting in Tertiary times, is difficult
to detect in terms of differential levels and in movements of
~argeoa.~spla~em~e11t   may be entirely absent.    Broad warping move-
ments of the rocks have very probably taken place, however, and
may be responsible for the slight variations in level of the
different tab.lelands and of the. residual hills.

===== page 3 (text)
                                   3

                           GENERAL GEOLOGY

       The rock. succession of the area may be summarized as
follows:-
       1.    Alluvium and wind-blown sand, either in the form of
             dunes or as a thin veneer, occurring for the most part
             in the low-lying salt.basins and swamps.
       2.    The "Durricrust II material composed of fragments and dis-
              jointed masses of si.liceous laterite, a secondary
             quartzite formed in Tertiary times from soils and
             alluvium under certain· climatic conditions.         The"Duri-
              crust" material is associated with angular highly
             silicified fragments of the underlying rocks and occurs
             in the form of. a mantle covering the tablelands.
       3.    White pipe clay material occurring at Woocalla and
             possibly on the south margin of Pernatty Lagoon as smalJ
              inliners of rock of tentative Creta6eous Age.
       4.    The sedimentary rocks       fo~ing   the bedrock of the region
              in the .following order of succession from youngest to
              oldest ...
    III.     Upper Sandstones.
             B.        White sandstone (lOOft. plus)
              A. ·Red sandstones and grits (600ft.)
     II.      Polomitic Limestone (50-188ft.)
      I.     Lower sandsto:q.e.s (50ft. plus)
            A thickness of n~arly 800ft. of basement rocks is inferrec
  from the ex:po·sures examined. in this area.         These rocks show>.all
  the features indicative of shallow water· and terrestrial condi-
                  '.
  tions of desposition.
       It is difficult to assign an age tothese sediments as no
  definite fossil evidence was found nor has it been recorded in
  previous reports.          The South Australian geological maps up to
  and including the 1928 edition, assigns to them a tentative
  Ordovician age, but the Late Professor Sir Edgeworth David
  depicts them as Pre-Cambrian (Newer Prote.rozoic) on his geologi-
  cal map of the Commonwealth of Australia.            The age of these
  rocks will be discussed in more detail·in a subsequent section

===== page 4 (text)
                                                                . :-. ....
                                                         ... . .;·:·.'
                                                           ~



               ·'                                       4 -..-,·

    of tni~ report.
                         Descriptions of the.various horizons of the above rock
    colum.p are as follows:-
               ·III           Upper Sa~dstones.
                         The upper Sandstones are so cal-led because they overlie the
· _Dolonii tic Limestone which forms a· d"istincti ve stratigraphic
    horfzon in the rock succession.'                                         The Upper sandstones are sub-
    divided into two groups:-
                 B. 'The White Sandstones.
                 A.       The Re'd Sandsto.nes and" Grits.
                         B.     The white·sandstones occur as· hard resistent cappings
    on the ·residaul hills, nameiy Channel Hill,- South Oakden Hiil,
    North qakden Hill and Mt •. Guµson; etc.                                        They _also occur on the
· hi.gher parts. o'f the table.land b.e~ween the .Birthday Siding and the
    Mt. Gusnon Mine.                             Three lithological sub-groups are definable-in
                                     I

    the . .following order from youngest to oldest.
        · iii •. -' 40 ft. (plus) of sandstone of variable grains size, not
                              particu&arly well bedded, but containing hard dense
                              quartzite layers usually.showing curious casts which.
                              strongly sugge;;t an·organic origin.                       This is the·youngest
                              rock horizon of b_asement. rocks exposed. in the area.

                    ii        30:...40.ft. _of white ·quartz.itic .sandstone; massive bed which
                          'stands out.in bold relief on or near the top of the
                              residua], .. hills .•... Its weathered· surface is somewhat
                              fe~ruginous and pr'esents                      a curious' pitted appearance,
                              .the ·f:imall cavitie:s .being on the average half an inch in
                              diameter. - On clos·e . examinatioI;t it was' found that the
                              cause:of this pitt~ng was due to the presence in the
                              rock of '.-?umerous uncemented patches of fine sand which
                          ·I:eadily disintergrated. on being exposed to the weather.

.   ~   ..                -The bed is.oest.seenon·Channel Hill near the East-West
                          ·. ·R~ilwf!y .. lin~ on "the. south end of Lake Windabout.                   A
             . ·;"
                         . : conglom_erate. bed, 2.ft. thick, containing on the average
                              one 'inch. diamet·er round sandstone and quartzite pebbles
                          "Was·seen at the.top of this white quartzite horizon on
                              t~e   Mt •. Gunson·Mine -               Bi~thday     Siding road.
                                         I   .

===== page 5 (text)
             i.     30-40ft. of white crossbedded sandstone.     This rock
                    horizon is dis.tinguished by its well-defined cross
                    bedded character.   In places it shows cross bedding
                    structures very similar to those of 'typical aeolian or
                    dune.cross bedding. ·The cross bedding suggests aeolian
                    conditi.o.ns of deposition for these lower white sandstone
                    beds, but from the above facts the upper part of the
                    white sans.stone group was deposited under shallow water
                    condi ti·ons.
.'.-.         A•     The Red Sandstones and Grits cover the major portion of
        the area.     They have for the most part, in weathered outcrop, a
        distinctive red .colour.    Grain size is very variable.     Bedding
        is generally well marked with current or Q'ross bedding universally
        present.     Shale layers are interb~dded in places with the red
        s_andstones, but are not universally present and generally are not
        conspicuous anywhere in the district.      The upper portion of the
        ·red sandstones .'and grits' horizon is. well exposed on the flanks
        of South Oakden Hill, w}+er.e. a thickness of 300ft. can be studied.
        At this locality the contact between the Red Sandstones and the
        White Sandstones outcrops.      This contact can also be seen on
        Channel Hill· and on Mt. Gunson •. It is defined chiefly by a
        colmur chan~e. _ The correiation of this contact on Mt. Gunson,
        Channel Hill and South Oakden Hili, at approximately the same
        level, is indicative of the existence of stable conditions in
        the region ··over·,~ long period ·of ·geological time.
              The lower porti.on of· the Red Sandstones and Grits occurs
        in the vicinity of the Mt. Gunson Mine, where they are copper
        bearing and are, therefore,- important from an economic aspect.
    _These rocks are.generally highly siliceous and where their
        .copper~content    is ~ufficiently high, they form a copper ore
        "
        which is amenable.to.treatment at the Port Pirie Smelters, where
    .a siliceous flux is used.          The ore occurrences in these rocks
        are discussed further on in this report

===== page 6 (text)
                           6

   II   Dolomitic Limestone.
        This rock horizon has a variable thickness.      It may or may
not have a continuous character throughout the region.       It occurr·
ence, however, is fufficiently extensive to assume, with fair
precision, that if forms a persistent stratigraphic horizon with
which general geology of the district can best be illustrated.
The configuration of the dolomitic limestone bed is of great
importance, because all the manganese and copper deposits are
distributed either on it or in the sandstone beds immediately
above or below it.    Phosphates are recorded as having been found
in joint planes in the limestone, but the occurrences are of no
economic value.
        The rock has a grey colour and has a blocky, jointed appea:
ance.   It represents recrystallized carbonated rocks.      In the
northern part of the. area. at Mt. Gunson Mine it has a thickness
of about 50ft., whilst in the-southern part of the area, in a bor,
about 8 milesnorth of Narkarina Well, it is over 188ft. thick.        It
is well exposed in the Commonwealth Railway Ballast Quarry at
Woocalla siding, where it appears_ to overlie con:f'ormab1y the

Lower Sandstones.
        It is quite possible that this contact may represent a
geological time break but no evidence was obtained to support
this contention.     In Mining Review 25, p. 55, the Government and
Assistant Government Geologists state that the limestone contact
in the Woocalla Quarry is an unconformable one.       Structural evi-
dence cannot support such a judgement as strikes and dips in
sandstone and limestone are conformable.
        The contact of the dolomitic limestone and the upper
sandstones was not seen.       It is reported in certain of the Mt.
Gunson Mines workings which were inaccessible at the time of the
inspection.   Dips and strikes in the dolomitic limestone and over·
lying sandstones are similar and conformable relationship between
the two rock horizons can be at least safely assumed for structur·
al and ore occurrence consideration.

===== page 7 (text)
                                7

            From a stratigraphic point of view a disconformity may
exist between the dolomite and the Upper and or the Lowe~ sand-
stones but its possible occurrence cannot be supported by facts.
   I        The Lower Sandstones.
            The lower sandstones are red in colour and are litholo-
gically similar to the Red Sandstones of the Upper Sandstone
series.       Those rocks may be seen in the Commonwealth Railway
Ballast Quarry at woocalla, where a thickness of them of about
50ft. is exposed and where the contact with the overlying dolomi-
tic limestone was observed.         At the Sweet Nell Mine, on Pernatty
Lagoon, these· lower sandstones are cupriferous immediatly below
the dolomitic.limestone.        Shaley layers occur in the lower sand-
stones on the western margin of Pernatty Lagoon near Mt. Gunson,
but shales are nowhere the predominant rock type.         By and large,
only a small thickness of the Lower Sandstones (say 50ft.) out-
crops in this district.
       5.     The rocks a~ depth below the badement sediments.
Thes.e rocks are of interest because they are the most probable
sources of the mineral deposits of the Mt. Gunson Pernatty Lagpon
District.        At localities near ·the district in question in deep
bores, sunk for.water, igneous rocks have been intersected.           To
the south·and south west porphyritic and granitic rocks outcrop
in the region of Iron Knob and the Gawler Ranges.        Slates are
known to occur in the Lake Torrens area.
             .                       .
            The older rocks at depth, therefore, can reasonably be
cupriferous.        The possible occurrence of granite, porphyry and
slate~      suggests an excellent environment suitable for the develop
ment of copper deposits.

                 REGIONAL G~LOGICAL STRUCTURE

            The Upper Sands.tones, the Dolomitic Limestone and the
Lower Sandstones form an apparently conformable series of
sediments which have a subhorizontal arrangement.

===== page 8 (text)
                                                                8
         Broadly speaking the structural_setting throughout the
region is one of a gentle basin and cone-like structur.e, locally
fractured and faulted.
         The lenticular character of the beds and the prevalence
of current bedding frequen~ly gives an impression locally, of the
occurrence of folds, but careful inspection showed the· error of
such ·conclusions.       It was only by extensive mapping that any
                                                    '          ·-
g·eneral .Wf!I'ping of the beds with mino~ local fracturing was
revealed.     No-true dips exceeding 25° were observed.
         The regional structure was satisfactorily determined in
spite of the ~eavy accumulations of overburden by tracing,
throughout the district, the general behaviour of the dolomitic
limestone.     The dolomitic lim~stone serves as·an excellent marker
horizon or key bed.               I~ conseque~ce,·throughout th~                                          district, its
interpolation in plan and section as a theoretically continuous
bed ·provides ~ simple and clear means of illustrating the regiona:
structure of the district·•.
        .. The persistent c~aracter of the dolomitic limestone bringi
the assumption of the continuity of this bed very close to actual-
                .                                                                             .       .
i ty.   :The assoqi.ation. of the mineral deposits with the dolomitic
limestone ·make the interpolation of this key bed· all the more
                                                                '.
important, because at· any loc,ality its position gives the favour-
able rock horiz9n for likely ore occurrences.
                          '       '.   ~       .                    I
                                                                                                  The dolomitic
.         -
limestone key bed. 'has been accordingly accentuated on the inter-
                 .            .            -       1.   . ..                          .           1




polated· pian a~q. .sections .'accompanying this report •
    . . - No defini teevidence of the occurrence of fa11l ting in the .
.aistrict wa~ ·obtained· in the course.of the reconnaissance •
                                   .
However, it would be ·wrong to surmise that faulting is entirely
                                                                             ..
absent· ·from the district.                                             The region is adjacent to the Spencer
Gulf"'."'~a.ke ~orrens
                     me:i;-idi·onal rift region in which major block
                                           ...
faul t-~ng· has occurred.. It is quite probable therefore, that
minor supplementary faulting has occurred in this· district.                                                       This
contingency is not indicated on the interpolated geologicalmaps,
·owing_t~·the de~rth of.factual evidence.                                                 The failure to locate
definite faults in the-district makes 'the establishment of a
genetic ;relationship b~tw·e~n concentration of minerals and

===== page 9 (text)
                           9

geological structure, an extremely difficult matter.

         GEOLOGICAL AGE OF THE BASEMENT ROCKS

       The basement rocks of the Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon
region have failed to yield ariy fossils with wich as age can be
assigned with fair precision to the rocks.
       ·On li thologica.l grounds, they were initially given a
tentative Ordovician age and were represented on the geological
map of South Australia as such.
        In Bu~letin 18, G.S.S.A., Mr. R. w. Segnit shows on Fig.
63, p. 173, the Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon sediments belonging
to the.Upper Pre-Cambrian portion of the Lower Cambrian - Pre-
 cambrian system of sediments which has a wide distribution in
South Australia.     This age has been given on a correlative basis,
as Mr. Segnit has not mentioned the Mt. Gunson area, in particula:
in that Bulletin.
        The rocks of the Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon area are
 contiguous with the rocks extending both north and south of the
 area and form part of one extensive relatively undisturbed sedi-
mentary series.     This series is assumed by Mr. Segnit to form
part of the Pre-Cambrian ~ Cambrian system so well deve]q>ed on
the eastern side of Spencer Gulf and Lake Torrens.      To accept
this assumption in order to find the position of the Mt. Gunson -
. Pernatty Lagoon basement rocks in this system, a correlation of
the rock column· of that district with a section of the compl~te
stratigraphic succession of the· system must be made.     Such a
correlation, however, is difficult to establish, as will be seen
in the following considerations, and, therefore, the age of the
Mt. Gunson rocks remain very uncertain.     The whole problem of the
geological age of the rocks is chiefly concerned with the deter-
mination of the position of the dolomitic limestone in th~ system.
        For the purposes of correlation, the complete stratigraph-
ical succession of Cambrian and Pre~Cambrian rocks, outlined by
Mr. Segnit in Bulletin No. 18 G.S.S.A. p. 188-9, is reproduced
below, together with the Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon rock column.

===== page 10 (text)
                                         10

It will be required for reference purposes in the following
discussion.
I.    GENERALIZED STRATIGRAPHICAL SUCCESSION OF THE GEOLOGICAL
         FORMATIONS OF THE LOWER CAMBRIAN - PRE-CAMBRIAN SEDI-
                            MENTARY SERIE3.
              (Bull. 18, G.S .• S.A. p. 188-189).
Lower Cambrian -
     Calcareous Sandstone                              E

     Archaeocyathinae Limestone ~                      E
     Fossiliferous Limestone                    )
     Grey to purple Limestone                          E - - - - - -                - - - -(1)
     Shales                                            E
Disconformity, (or unconformity ?)
Upper Pre-Cambrian -
                   .t.i.
     Flinders Range Sandstone Quartzite Series                                D?
     Purple Series -
         Upper Group -.
            Purple slates                                                     D6h
         Middle group -
             Sandstone
             Quartzite - Sandstone. Conglomerate
            Siliceous.Slates and Quartzites
             Dolomitic Limestone ~ - - - - - - {2)                            D6b     - g
             Grey Shales
             Felspathic Sandstone
            Quartzite
        Lower Group -
            Purple. Shales                                                    D6a
                                          ........e______________________________,.;·D5~- - - - -(3)
~D~o.l_om--r-i~t~i~c_L.,,......im--..e~s~t~on
_Dolomitic Quartzite :                                                             DZi'.
Tapl~y' s     Hill Series - .
      · Upper group-
           Grey Slated ·                                                      D3g
           Dolomitic Limestone                                                D3f- - - - (4)
           ------------------------------------------

===== page 11 (text)
                                                 11   -

      Middle Group -
         Dark Grey Slates    ·        -( )


                                                                !
         Grey Limestone   - - - - - 5                                  D3b - e
         Blue-Grey Calcareous Slates and
                               Slll.ales
         Grey Quartzite
      Lower Group -        .
         Calcareous (Ribbon) Shales                                    D3a
Post - Glacial Do,omitic Limestone                                     D2 - - - - - (6)
Disconformity.
·Sturtian Tillite -
      Upper Boulder Beds                        Dlc
      I~tercalated Series (Quartzitet Dolomitic
       Limestone, Shales and Tillite;           Dlb
      Lower Boulder Beds.                       Dla
Unconformity.
Middle Pre-Cambrian -
     Upper Series -
       Felspathic Quartzite                                   C5
       Ferruginous. Felspathic Sandstones                     C4
       Dolomitic Limestones                                   C3- - - - ---(7)
       ~Qu-=a-r~t~z~i~t-e-s~=-~-=........-------------------C~2·
       Shales                                                 Cl
      Lower Series -
        Dolomitic
             __ Lim.est one
        ~S~h-a~1-e_s
                                               CL------------( 8 )
                        _______________________CL
                        a_n~d.._,.s~1-a~t-e_s




        ~artzite                                                       CL
          rgillaceous Sandstone                                        CL

        It will be seen in the above generalized succession,
Table I, that limestone occurs in eight different parts of the
succession.            These limestone occurrences are underlined and
numbered.       They will be correlated in turn with the Mt. Gunson
occurrence.
II   MOUNT GUNSON - PERNATTY LAGOON SEDIMENTARY SUCCESSIONS.
      Upper Sandstones.
         White Sandstone    (lOOft. plus )
         Red sandstones and grits (600ft)
       Dolomitic Limestone                         (50-188 ft. plus)
       Lower Sandstones                         (50ft. plus)
      1 •. If the Mt. Gunson limestone is given a Lower Cambrian
age corresponding to (1) in the above table, the underlying sand-
stones can reasonably be inf erred as Upper Pre-Cambrian Flinders
Range Sandstone - Quart 7 ite Series, hut the sandstones overlying
the dolomitic limestone· at Mt. Gunson find no correlative in this
portion of the stratigraphic succession.

===== page 12 (text)
                              12

     2.    If the dolomitic limestone of Mt. Gunson is made
equivalent in age to the dolomitic limestones of the Middle group
of the Upper Pre-Cambrian Purple Series (2) above, the sandstones
both above and below the limestone at Mt. Gunson find no close
correlatives in the succession owing to the preponderance of
shales, in general, in the Purple Series.
     3.    If the Mt. Gunson limestone is made equivalent in age to
the Upper Pre-Cambrian deolomitic limestone below the Purple
Series (3 above), the overlying sandstones of Mt. Gunson cannot
be correlated with the Purple Shales in a comparable position in
the general rock succession.
     4 & 5.      If the dolomitic limestone of Mt. Gunson is given
a similar age to that of the Tapley·' s Hill series (4 and 5 above)~
the ~orrelation is questionable; ~ecause the latter series have
a predominant development of shales both above and below the
limestone horizons.
     6.    As no sign of Tillite occurs at Mt. Gunson beneath the
limestone, or of calcareous shales above it, the Mt. Gunson lime-
stone cannot be correlated with the Post Glacial Dolomitic Lime-
stone (6 above) of the generalize4 succession.
     7.    With the Middle Pre-Cambrian limestone (7 above), the
best correlation is made between the Mt. Gunson rocks and those
outlined.in the generalized succession.      The Upper and Lower
Sandstones.and Grits at Mt. Gunson are comparable to the sand-
stones and quartzites respectively in the generalized succession.
     8.     If the limestone of Mt. Gunson is made lower Middle Pre-
cambrian in age·similar to (8) of the generalized succession, the
correlation of the Mt. Gunson sandstones with comparable beds in
the generalized section is difficult owing to the presence of
shales both above and below this horizon in the generalized
succession.
          ~he   net result of the avove line of enquiry suggests the
following possible ages for the Mt. Gunson rocks in the Lower
                     ..
Cambrian-Pre -Cambrian System:-

===== page 13 (text)
                           13

     ·A.   The Mt. Gunson limestone is Lower Cambrian.    The Upper
sandstones ·at Mt. Gunson either conformably overlie the limestone
and are of Cambrian age, or they disconformably overlie the lime-
stone and may be of Post-Cambrian age.      They may quite possibly
be TertiarJ" !   Lithologically, however, they are markedly similar
to the Lower Sandstones which would belong, on the above assump-
tion to the Flinders Range Sandstone - Quartzite Series of Upper
Pre-Cambrian age and it is, therefore, likely that the discon-
formity, if it exists, between the limestone and upper sandstones
at Mt. Gunson only represents a small geological time break.
      B.   The Mt. Gunson limestone belongs to the Middle group of
the Purple Series of Upper Pre-Cambrian Age (D6 b - g).      This age
is considered possible because the overlying and underlying sand-
stones with their occasional thin shaley layers have a red tinge,
- secondly, because there occurs quartzites and sandstones in thi,
section.of the generalized rock succession.      It would be erron-
eous to neglect this possibility on account of the absence of
shales in the Mt. Gunson rock column.      Lenticularity of beds
must be allowed for, as well as the existence of changing condi-
tions of deposition from place to place.
     c.    The Mt. Gunson.limestone is of Middle Pre-Cambrian age.
This age as indicated previously, fits all the facts presented by
the ·rock column at Mt. Gunson and by the generalized succession,
and, therefore, appears to be the most l:ikely as a result of this
line of enquiry.
     However, ·it is wrong thinking to base age determination sole
-ly on hard and fast correlations depending on lithological
qualities of rocks.    None of the above suggested ages can be
accepted without further considering the regional geology of the
Mt. Gunson ·~ Pernatty Lagoon District.     To the north of Mt. Gun-
son at Andamooka, Roxby_Downs and Parakylia Stations, sandstones
of similar character·to- those at Mt. Gunson have been assigned
an Upper Pre-Cambrian age and have been correlated with the
Flinders Range Sandstone - Quartzite Series by Mr. Segnit.       To
the south at Lincoln Gap, a similar age has been assigned to
similar sedimentary rocks.      The continuity of these sediments

===== page 14 (text)
                          -·14    r.
 from Lincoln Gap to the country north of Mt. Gunson is an
 established fact.    The Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon sandstones i~
 consequence most probably form part of the Flinders Range Sand-
 stone - Quartiite Series.       This line of reasoning leads to a
 fourth possible age for the rocks of the Mt. Gunson Region,
 namely, Upper Pre-Cambrian (D7) and it is based on acceptance
·.of Mr. Segnit's conclusions concerning similar rocks in the same
 geological province.
      Further, the acceptance of this Upper Pre-C~brian age
 introduces the occurrence of limestone into the Flinders Range
 Sandstone - Quartzite Series, 7 (d), an occurrence which has not
 bee reported to date in this series.
      The above analysis suggests four possible ages for the Mt.
 Gunson rocks and for the limestone in particular if these rocks
 are members of the Cambrian Pre-Cambrian succession.
      1. Lower Cambrian · .            (E)
      2. Upper Pre-Cambrian            (D7)
      3. Upper Pre-Cambrian            (D6 b - g)
      4 •. Middle pre-Cambrian         (C3)
      The present uncertainty of the geological age of the Mt.
 Gunson rocks is due either to the failure by previous investiga-
 tors to take into account the dolomitic limestone occurrence at
 Mt. Gunson, or the limest.one occurrence has not been critically
 considered in regard to its possible age prior to this report.
      In Bulletin 14, G.S.S.A., Dr. R.L. Jack has drawn a geologi-
 ·cal· section passing through the sourthern end of the Mt. Gunson
 district.   On the section Dr. Jack shows Gibson's Camp Bore, near
 Narkanna well and he has inf erred the hard blue rock in the
 bottom of this bore to be slate. ·rn recent drilling for water
 on Oakden Hill Station, at a locality about eight miles north of
 Narkanna Well, limestone was intersected in a bore at a vertical
 depth of 300ft. "The bore reached a total depth of 488ft. without
 passing out of the limestone rock.
      The result of this drilling suggests that the hard blue rock
 in Gibson's Camp Bore is limestone and not slate as Dr. Jack has
 inferred it to be.     If this modified interpretation is correct,
 the _Sa.tes, found in the neighbouring country to the east of the

===== page 15 (text)
                             15

Mt. Gunson district are at a much greater depth in the Mt. Gunson
district than was formerly beibieved.     This line of reasoning
suggests, therefore, that slates underlie the Lower. Sandstones
in the Mt. Gunson District and by correlation with the generalizei
succession above, these slates may be Middle Cambrian (Cl) in age.
thereby marking the overlying Lower Sandstones at Mt. Guason
Middle Cambrian (C2), the Dolomitic Limestone (C3) and the Upper
Mt. Gunson Sandstones, Middle Cambrian (C4).
        The results. of investigation into the age of the Mt.· Gunson
rocks are therefore very indefinite.

           GENERAL CONSIDERATION OF THE MINERAL DEPOSITS

A.    The Copper Deposits.   The copper deposits which have been
worked in the past, in the district, include those at Mount
Gunson Mine, Pernatty Lagoon, G1:J.D.Yot, Ramsay, Gun and the Sweet
Nell.     The Mount Gunson deposit at the present moment is the only
one being worked and it will be considered later in detail.
        The copper in general occurs in sandstone beds which are in
contact or in close stratigraphical proximity-.to the dolomitic
limestone which also contains copper minerals.      The copper miner-
als     are found in the sandstones in very restricted areas, but in
the dolomite, traces of copper minerals can be seen having a more
wide-spread distribution.     The workable deposits up to the preseni
have been restricted entirely to:the sandstones.      The Mt. Gunson
deposit occurs in the Upper Sandstones, whilst the Sweet Nell
deposit occurs in the Lower Sandstones.      The copper minerals are
distributed in the sandstone beds in a very irregular fashion.
This. irregularity is accentuated by the heterogeneous character
.of the· beds in which lenticularity and cross bedding are most
marked.     The thinner sandstones, comparatively softer and more
friable tend to be more genial towards receiving the copper
minerals.     These·friable bands, along strike~ frequently change
to massive qu~rtzitesandstones with often an appreciable dimin-
ution of mineral content.

===== page 16 (text)
                           16

     The following description of the nature of the mineralizatia
at Mt. Gunson was given by H.J.C. Conolly in· a report on the
mine to the Zinc Corporation:-
     "Oxidized ores of copper comprising chloride sulphate,
      carbonate and siliceous minerals, either as individuals or
      admixtures of the amorphous type, together with chalcocite
      or copper glance, occur within the lower beds of the Upper
      Sandstone.     rn·may places the green copper minerals are
      developed throughout the s~dstone beds forming a cement
      to the_ sand_ grains whilst in other exposures, they are con-
      fined to joints, cracks and bedding plane partings.      In
      some sections both conditions of occurrence are present.
      Chalcocite is exhibited as veinlets filling cracks and as
      blebs within the sandstones with or without the oxidized
     -minerals.     The more friable and gritty sandstones appear
      to conta~n the oxidized minerals in a more evenly distribu-
      ted form than the denser fine-grained quart~itic beds."
     "That the copper contents are distributed irregularly is
      apparent rrom an examination in the Mt. Gunson Open Cup

      and Tunnel.     A"full section of five to six feet in thick-
      ness may be s·een to merge gradually into barren sandstone
      or, on the other hand the lower beds may become lean and th
      higher persist as a copper-bearing horizon.     No uniform
      behaviour can be established, but it is quite obvious that
      barren and lean masses must be exptected as the beds are
     . followed l.n any direction. n
     These descriptions apply equally well in the case of the
Sweet Nell deposit where the mineralization is developed in sub-
horizontal sandstones below the Dolomitic limestone over a width
of about 3ft.
     At the Pernatty Lagoon workings about 2 miles north of the
Mt. Gunson Mine, the copper m~nerals are principally sulphides,
chalcocite, covellite, ·bornite, with subordinate atacamite,
malachite, etc.     This occurrence could not be examined because
all the workings have either fallen in or were filled with salt

===== page 17 (text)
                                17    -·
  water.      The occurrence is of interest·because it represents a
  tran~itional_stage     in the proce~s_ of oxidation of a bedded
  sulphide ore body.      Mt. Gunson is a completely oxidized deposit,
  whereas the Gun deposit, half a mile.east of Mt. Gunson, according
  to Mr. W.E. Wainwright i$ a partially oxidized deposit, possibly
  in a later stage of sxidation ··to that of Pernatty Lagoon sulphide
  deposit..     The report of W. E. Wainwright
                                        .
                                               on Perna tty' Lagoon,
                                                              .
                                                                     Gun,
  Gunyot and Ramsay deposits appears in Mining Review No. 20 pp 41-
  51.   The Gunyot deposit is similar in character to the Mt. Gunson
  deposit.
           The .:following grouping, therefore, summari.zed the relative
  state·of oxidation of.the copper deposits of the district.
           Mt. Gunson, Gunyot, Sweet Nell - completely oxidized.
           Gun - not completely oxidized.
           Perriatty Lagoon - slightly oxidized.
  B.    The Manganese Deposits.
           Manganese is the most commonly occurring mineral in the
  Mt.· Gunson district.     It can:'be.,detected in the hand specimen, in·
  the dol.om:l tic limestone, in prac.tically every locality where this
  rock outcrops.      Only in a few places, however, is the concentra-
  tion of manganese mineral .sufficiently great to form workable ore
··.deposits.-    The deposits which are being worked a,t present occur
  on· Pernatty Lagoon.about ·half way between Mt. Gunson and the
  Sweet Nell copper deposits, and about 5 miles north of Woocalla.
  The manganese ores exploited to date are solely oxidized ores
 ·c·omposed mainly oi' manganese ·oxides, chiefly pyrolusi te.      Bari te
 ·aJ?-d fluorite have been reported as occurring in close proximity
  to the manganese deposits, whilst'bar:lte and calcite are known
  to occur as minor accessory minerals in the manganese ores.          The
  crushed ore produced contains approximately 35-45% manganese.
           The manganese.ore occurs in decomposed broken zones in the
  dolomitic limestone.      In some places large bodies of ore are
  formed with ill:-d.efined boundaries.     In other places large
  patches.of littl~ aitered:~r un~ltered dolomiti6 limestone are
  entirely· surrounded by ore •. In the short time spent as the
  deposit there was.no opportunity to seek a structural explanatioil
  of·the deposit.      The ore anddolomiti'c limestone is brecciated
  in certain localities in the_deposit·and the brecciation suggests

===== page 18 (text)
                                     18       '
                                             ~·




   there may possibly occur a fault or fault pattern or zone which
   would provide the passages for ."t~e ore-f ormitj.g solutions and
                                 .        .
   f'acilitat.e the replacement of the limestone. To test this hypo-
   thesis it would be necessary to study the sandstone dolomitic
   limestone contacts and look for any possible offsets of them
   attri:"fub.table to.faulting.
             Owing to the extremely erratic .distribution of the mangan-
   ese minerals in the ore zone, it would be very difficult to lay
   out a testing programme for ore reserve estimates without a
   careful study of the structure and the peculairities of the ore
   bodies.     Little ore, at present is-showing beyond working faces,
   but there are favourable indications of further ore and develop-
   ment and e:Xploratory work should be further advanced as the
   pessibili ties of the deposits are most promising.           .Earlier and
  ·more comprehensive reports on the deposits appear in Mining
   Reviews Nos. 25 and 31.·
             Elsewhere in the district.small prospecting workings have
   opened up.small patches bf manganese ore, but by no means have
   the possibil:lties of the.district been fully expmibred.
                          O~igin   of the Mineral Deposits.

             Bedded--mineral depo~its' p~rticularly those of copper have
   been.the subject.of considerable study throughout the world in
   regard to
          . . their.mode·
              . .         of .origin • . The study of the. Mt. Gunson -
   Pernatty ~agoon.mineral deposits offers further enlightenment on
   thi~. problem.in._ that     "it involves a consideration of bedded copper
   ~ccurrences     in various stages of oxidation and at the same time
   :includes tlj.e. problem of· an interesting mineral association,
                      I



   namely c·opp_er, a:nd.-Mt;ing~nese.     The deposits ·of the two minerals
   have many f~atur.es in common and· in consequence appear to have
'... _comp,arab1e mo.des .Of origin.:·
           The following chemical analysis of the dolomitic limestone
   shows t:q.e .as'sociation of copper and manganese.
          The sample-was. taken' some distance· away from worked
   mine~al depos~ts.      ·
          -Mr. T. W•. Dalwood·, assayer to the Mines Department,. who
   made the·anal,sis, described the copper as occurring with the
   manganese in fin~ veins throughout the mass. · .      ·

===== page 19 (text)
                                                  .
                                                  \
                                                      \




               Silica (Si0 2 ) ·             .'            1.42%
               Alumina (A1 2o )                            0.?4
                             3
               Ferric oxide (Fe 2o )                       1.34
                                  3
               Lime (CaO)                                 28.99
               Magnesia (MgO) .                            21.12
               water (H2 o)                                0.50
               Carbon dioxide       (co2 )                44.28
               Cupric oxide (CuO)                          0.21·(0.l? Copper)
               Manganese oxide (MnO)                        1.92 (1.49) Manganese)

                                                          100.52%


         The following treatment presents a purely hypothetical
picture of the ·possible genesis of the mineral deposits of the
Mt. Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon district, because it is based
entirely on facts observed in th~ field.
         The main features of the mineral occurrences are as
follows: -
         1.    The deposm~seare far removed from igneous rocks and,
therefore, the source of the minerals is quite obscure •
         .2.   The ore bodies · occ"!-l:r chiefly as metasomatic replace-
ments and partly as fil.lings in the form of concretions along
bedding
     .
     .
        and fracture planes
                          .
                            in .the sedimentary rocks.
         3.    The ore bodies are restricted to one particular
stratigraphic. horizon.
         4.    The mineralization is for the most part., particularly
in the case of copper, restricted in area.
         5.    The mineralizatio.n does not follow in all cases, the
bedding planes or one definite sedimentary' rock type.
         ThrEe clear~cut hypotheses have been advanced to explain
the.origin of this type of mineral occurrence.                      Firstly, they
may .be· of syng,ene~ic origin, in. ·which the minerals in the ·
          .    . l  .     .
deposits are_thnceived as being concentrated at the time of
deposition of· the beds.           The most se~ious objections to this
hypothesis are the following:-

===== page 20 (text)
                                   20


           (i)    The ores are not restricted to one single rock type,
                  such as limestone.
      (ii)        The ores are not confined to one definite bed of rock.
  (iii)            Finally, there is an absence of possible precipitants,
                   e.g., traces ot plant remains, ·etc.
                 The second hypothesis suggest a hypogenetic origin in
which the minerals are conceived as being deposited by ascending
hydrothermal solutions.            This hypotheses is quite acceptable
b~t        it does not adequately consider all the facts and there is o
one serious objection to it, namely, there does not exist any
strong evidence at present of a definite genetic relationship
between geological structu~e and ore occurrence, a relationship
which is an essential basis for such an hypottEsis.
                 The third and final.clear-cut hypothesis is the epigenetfu
origin enunciated by Lindgren in which "the ores have been con-
centrated by meteroic waters, which leached the small quantities
of metals disseminated in 'the strata."            The objection to this
hypothesis is also the fact that to date an ore-structure
relationship has not been established.             This failure must be at
present attributed to aD;. ·ip.sufficient amount of geological study
having been done in the region.             It would, therefore, be
erroneous to incline towards an acceptance of the non-existence
                     ..     .
of a definite ore-structure relationship.
                 In spite of the lack. of definite structural facts, the
third or epigentic hypothesis is the most feasible at any rate
for ·copper deposits~           When the occurrence of manganese is
considered in conjunction with that of copper, one hesitates to
prono.unce this hypothesis as holding throughout the district
because manganese is common mineral of ores of magmatic origin.
      '·
Also the r~ported occurrence of dulorite and barite raise
. further doubts.          They suggest that a hydrothermal origi.n, at leas
in part, cannot be entirely eliminated from the. p·icture of ore
genesis •           .At ariy:rate the presence of these minerals indicates
that the ore solutions were hot rather than cold.

===== page 21 (text)
                                 21

            Generally, how.ever, the= epigenetic mode of origin is
 consider~d. dominant.      The copper deposits are typically "Red Bed'
 occurrences.        The copper minerals.are conceived as having been
 derived from copper beari.ng lodes of disseminated copper masses
 in the older rocks at depth.            It has already been suggested that
 these rocks.can reasonably provide the necessary.conditions for
 mine~.al    deposits in them.        The copper minerals were leached
. from these deposits. by heated saline meteroic waters.• toThese
.waters penetrated the older rocks through fizzures~            The ~opper
 minerals were transported in solution by meteroic waters to
 certain loci or deposition in the overlying porous sandstones.
 Deposition.was ·probably brought about in part by the action of
 reducing agencies, the natures of which are obscure.            It is also
 very probable that the dolomitic limestone acted indirectly in .
 the precipitation of copper.            For example, the limestone may have
 acted in the capacity of a relatively impermeable bed and the
 establishment of favourable physical rather than chemical
 conditions of precipitation.
            H.J~C.   Conolly and J.K. Gustafsen, who examined the Mt.
 Gunson mines for the Zinc Corporation, favour this epigenetic
 mode of origin," _at l_east; for the Mt. Gunson deposit.         Conolly'
 hq.s reported evidence of faulting at Mt •. Gunson, and although it
 was not seen by the writer·, the following extract from Conolly' s
 report adds further strength to the validity of the above
 hypot;ia;,esis. · "The distribution. of the copper contents in the
 sandstones appear to be related to fizzures formed by minor
 f~ulting.      There is evidence of a fizzure in the open cut near
· Brennan~~ Shaft, and it. is. . suggested that there is some probabil-
 ity that the location of the vario~s .deposits have been deter-
 mined ·.by infiltrations of solutions from channels formed by such
 faults,. in contradistinction to·a more or less uniform distribu-
 tion,· throughout· the sandstone. beds·. That is, the copper content
                      ..
 have been introduced subsequent to  .
                                        the. accumulation of the sedi-
 ments and may be more. enriched in proximity to the fizzures".

===== page 22 (text)
                               22

        In this respect Lindgren believes epigenetic ores to have
been forming continously s.ince the establishment of active water
circulation in the beds.
        The initial copper mineral form~d would very probably have
been chalcoite, which would then be subject to alteratio~
depending on the level of ground water.            The Pernatty Lagoon
 deposit occurring at and below the present water level, contains
 mainly chalc'oite.     On the· other hand, the Mt. Gunson deposit
                                '
 contains only traces.of chalcocite.         The major portion of the
 original chalcocite in the deposit has undergone decomposition
   .           .
 and oxidation owing to a lowering of the water level subsequent
 to the deposition· of the chalcocite.
        E.S. Bastin (Econ.Geol. vol. 28, p. 422) suggests that
 bedded c.ci.pper deposits may in places be subjected to a cycle or
 cycles of changes involvi,ng deposition, erosion, oxidation and
 solution,. transportation, and redeposition before they attain
 their present form.       Such a concept:i,on is: nqt tenable here,
 because th~ copper minerals ·are related solely to one strati-
 graphic horizon and the configuration of the present land surface
 of t_he ground water table is· not ·controlling factor of the loci
 of deposition.       The position of the ground-water table only
 controls secondary enrichment as it does in the majority of
 mineral deposits.
        The genesis of the manganese deposits is very probably
 similar in most features to that of the copper deposits on accomi
 of. their comparable charac.teri~tics of the respective deposits.
 The manganese is, therefore,       ~onc_ei ved   as originating from miner-
.. al deposits at depth, the manganese being tr~nsported in solution
. by meteroric w~ters through channels produced by faulting and
 fracturing.       On coming in contac·t with the dolomitic limestone,
 these-solutions encountered favourable_conditions for the
 precipitation of the manganese minerals.

===== page 23 (text)
                          .23.     .   ...


       The extent of secon¢lary enrichment in the manganese d~posits
is not known.    Enrichment ca~sedby the concentration due to the
natural erosion and solution of the dolomitic limestone is in
~esidual   clays containing patches and veins of manganese.   The
clays are formed from the weE!t~:ering of the dolomitic limestones
containing manganese.




                                 ASSISTANT GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST

===== page 24 (text)
      REPORT ON THE MOUNT GUNSON COPPER DEPOSITS.
 (supplementary to the General Geological Report on the Mount
              Gunson - Pernatty Lagoon Distrrct).

                          LOCATION
      The Mount Gunson copper mine is situated near the western
 margin of Pernatty Lagoon, 12 miles north east of Birthday Siding
 on the Transcontinental railway line,      Birthday Siding is about
 80 miles from Port Augusta at the head of Spencer Gul~.       From
 the Siding to the mine there runs a graded road which intersects
 the main Port Augusta - Tarcoola road 3 miles distant from the
 Siding.

              CHARACTER OF THE COPPER DEPOSITS

      The general character of the Mount Gunson deposits has been
 described in the geological report on the Mount Gunson Pernatty-
 Lagoon District.
      The known copper ores occur as flat, irregular tabular bodies
 in sub-horizontal sandstone beds immediately overlying a dolomitic
 limestone.    The vertical range of the ore horizons in the sand-
 stones would not exceed ?Oft.       The widths of the individual ores
 seams vary from 30in. to 132in. (plus).       They have a strike east
 of north and dip northward at a flat angles.       The strike and dip
 of the. copper occurrences ·comform very closely with ~hose hof the
 sandstone.
      Two ore horizons or seams appear to have been developed and
 a third is suggested but not proved.       They are as follows (see
 map):-
      (1)     The main ore horizon in the Mount Gunson open cuts.
      This horizon is known, to extend south westward through the
 Tableland shaft to Brennan's workings.       It follows very closely
 a contact between a red· sandstone and a white sandstone, the
 latter one overlying the former.      The copper horizon in the
 ·smelter shaft is probably on the extension of the main ore hori-
- zon going north from· the main open cut (see section map).       This

===== page 25 (text)
                              2   - .»

conclusion is based on the assumption that the main copper hori-
zon has. a flat northerly dip (say 5-10 degrees) between the main
open cut and the Smelter shaft.          Dr. J •. K. Gustafsen, on the contra
-ry, believes the Smelter shaft horizon to be a separate hor.izon,
which is stratigraphically below the main open cut horizon.            Both
these contingencies should be allowed for until further testing
or development work supplies additional data.
        (2)   The ore horizon in Brennan's shaft.
        This horizon occurs in a sandstone bed.immediately overlying
the dolomitic limestone.      Until further information is available,
the correlation of it with (l)' above, or with the Smelter shaft
horizon is inly guess work.       For the present this horizon is
considered to be a separate horizon stratigraphically Mo.w the mai
main.open cut horizon (1).
        (3)   An ore horizon may occur immediately below the dolmmitic
limestone in a position comparable to that of the Sweet Nell ore-
body.     Up to the present no exploratory work has been done to test
such a possible ore position.

                       EARLY HISTORY OF THE MINE
        Reports on the Mount Gunson mine have appeared in the South
Australian Mining _Reviews from time to time.          From these reviews
the ·following short 'resume has been compiled.
        The copper deposits were discovered about the year 1895.          In
1899, 50 tons of 14%·ore are reported to_have been dispatched for
·treatment.     In 1901 the Government Geologist inspected the proper-
ty anf favourably reported on the copper occurrence.            A reverbera-
tory smelter was erected in 1905, but smelting operations were
not successful on account of the highly siliceous nature of the
ore.     In.1909,_Inspector. Jones of the Mines Department recommended
theerection of a treatmen~ plant at the mine, as he then consider-
ed that development work 111.as proving a highly promising deposit
of copper.      Between 1911 and 1915, the Mount Gunson Company
worked the deposit and carried out testing operations prior to
the erection of a suitable leaching plant.           There is no record of
the leaching plant having been co~pleted or put into operation.

===== page 26 (text)
                             3

During 1917, 1918 and 1919, the company sent 1411 tons of dressed
ore to smelters at Cockie Creek;        553 tons of the .above ore were
estimated to contain 8% copper.     The Mount Gunson Company finally
ceased operations in 1919.


                       RECENT OPERATIONS

     In 1937, a mineral lease embracing the Mount Gunson and
adjacent deposits was taken up by Mr. M.A. Mawby for the purpose
of examining and ·testing the ·prospects thereon.      The exploratory
work carried out led up to the present mining operations.
     Independent reports on the lease were made by Messrs. H.J.C.
Conolly and J.K. Gustafsen for the Zinc Copporation Ltd.        These
reports have been made available to the Mines Department and data
contained therein are incorporated in this report.

                         POSSIBLE ORE

     The ore deposits at Mount Gunson are essentially low grade
deposits and a large tonnage of possible ore must therefore be
proved in them, before they can be ~onsidered as mining proposi-
tions.   With a mill-head grade of 3.14%, Dr. J.K. Gustafsen made
a possible tonnage estimate of 395,000 tons at 3.14%.        This
estimate includes figures for Pernatty Lagoon and Gunyot deposits.
He has summarized .the data on which the estimates was based in th1
following table: · ·

===== page 27 (text)
                            TABLE 1.                         -ORE POSITION
                                                                                                      . ..
                                                                                                       .,.
                                                                                               as at· 27th. July, 1937.              •

                                           Probable Ore       Probable and possible Ore                      Remarks
WORKINGS, ORE BLOCKS                              Millhead                    Millhead                                                   ore
                                 :Tons          Grade in%        Tons      Grade in
                                                                                  - .
                                                                                      %      Probable Ore              Probalbe & possible
1.        Pernatty Lagoon          127,000           2.86     203,000          2.86        Wainwright 1914         Some Cu in quartzite
                                                                                                                   below"leaching sand~'
2.        Gunyot                   16,000            2.30      21,000          2.30        Wainwright 1914         Possible westward
                                                                                                                   extension.
     M (a) Main open cut           15,000            5.13      19,700          5.13        Practically proved      Limited by topography
     t. (b) .Tableland shaft       .2,750            3.00·    49, 900          3.00        Fairly conservative     Assumes continuity half
                                                                                                                   way to (d) & (e)
     G     (c) West_ern open cu1
                & tunnel                 510         6.75         510         6.75         Proved                  Proved.
     u     (d) Young's open cu1        3,430         6.10      25,800         4.00         Practically proved      ~ssumes        continuity half
                                                                                                                   way to (b)
     N (e)     Brennan ··s Workir gs6,170            3.46      45,600          3.46        .iesumealcontinuity     llesumesmgo:hti:hu<i ~Y half
                                                                                           between old & new pit   ~¥f'.tor-;~:fel).ni.:;.d..... ·.
     s (f) Main of .Main Oper                                                         ..
                   Cut                                         20,600          3.00        Doubtful               Now being tested,
                                                                                                                  grade assumed.
     0     (g)Smelter Shaft       J.,,780            3.00.      1,780         3.00         Guesswork, old·date limited; important positiB
           (h)Brennan's open cu t 2,740              4.47       5,480         4.47         Practically proved     Assumes limited exten-
                                                                                                                  sion
     N     (j) Dumps                   1,500         2.50       1,500          2.50        Roughly but conservatively estimated.
              All workings         177,350           3.12     394,870          3.14        Possibility of considerably extending these
                                                                                           figures depends on: (1) Western extension of
                                               say                      say                ore beyond·(e): (2) Extension of smelter
                                   177,000           3.12     395,000          3.14        shaft and ~rennan Shaft ore horizons.
           Open cut ore.           171,000                    330,000                      Roughly estimated.
           Stope Ore                   6,000                   65,000                      Most new ore not included in these estimates
                                                                                            would probably be stoped •


     ..

===== page 28 (text)
                            (4)

     The estimate of 395,000 tons at 3.14% is insufficient to
warrant the erection of a plant at the present price of copper
(£86.10.0.).     This estimate can only be increased by an explora-
tory campaign.     The problem of the advisabil-i ty of future
exploration is dealt with at the end of the report.
Present ore position.
      The present mining operations are concerned solely with the
working of the higher grade patches of ore which can be profita-
bly treated at the Port Pirie smelters.      This ore is exposed in
the main open cut.
      Production, at present, a!nounts to about 200 tons or ore
per week of copper (£86.10.0) is(£3.17.9) per ton.
      Ore reserves stand at roughly 18,000 tons, assuming a
continuation of the present system of open cut mining and a
minimum grade of 4J/,ffe.
      The maximum rate of ·production would be 250 tons per week,
which is the maximum weekly tonnage that can betreated at Port
Pirie.
      The mine, on the above basis, has a life of 18 months.
Exploration and future prospects.
      It is fairly definite that a profitable mine cannot be built
up on the low-g_rade ore at present available in the open cuts.
It is also very problematical whether it is advisable to under-
take further exploration because of the following difficulties:-
      (1} Ore reserves of 18,000 tons at 4~ are not likely to
yield a sufficient profit to pay for an exploratory campaign.
      (2)   Any exploratory campaign can only be expected to yield
low grade ore comparable to that already found.
      (3)   Any exploratory campaign would involve the proving of
alarge tonnage of possible ore and also a consierable expense as
extensive areas would require testing.
      (4)   Open cut.ore prospects are limited.
      (5)   Sf.tope ore prospects are handicapped by the universal
low-grade character of the copper seams and their relatively
small widths.

===== page 29 (text)
                         (5)


       (6)   The majority of the actual prospects are concerned witl
stope ore· for which mining costs would be high.
       On the evidence available, the conclusion is that the
deposits do not show sufficient promise to be worth further
exploration work at present metal·prices.
       The exhaustion of the present ore reserves in the open cuts
will bring the present mining operations at Mount Gunson to an
end.




                                  ASSISTANT GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST

