===== page 1 (ocr)
Ww

“‘DEPARTMENT™ OF ‘MINES:
SOUTH AUSTRALIA

‘SOURCE ‘AND-DISTRIBUTION. OF HEAVY METALS IN CAMBRIAN AND HARINOAN:

SHELF SEDIMENTS «IN SOUTH.AUSTRALIA

 

‘PR. “Thomson,
Senior Geologist,
Regional’ Mapping: ‘Section:

 

CONSENTS’

. ‘Page
ABSTRACT : 4
INTRODUCTION 4
GEOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENTS . 2
DISTRIBUTION OF LEAD (TABLES 1 & 2) 3

DISTRIBUTION OF COPPER

4 - ATABLES. '3.-& 1) 3
VOLCANICS, Ly
“OREGIN OF: THE: LEAD’ AND ‘COPPER 4

REFEREN CES

TABIES 1, 2, 3 & 4,

Rept.Bk, 60/4,
G.S. 3053
DM. 765/61
6th January, 1965.. De, 439/64

===== page 2 (ocr)
fe

DEPARTMENT OF MINES
SOUTH AUSTRALIA

SOURCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF HEAVY METALS IN CAMBRIAN AND MARINOAN
SHELF SEDIMENTS HY SOUTH AUSTRALIA,* /

ABSTRACT
The sedimentary environment of Cambrian and Marinoan shelf
sediments in South Australia is outlined, Tables are presented

showing the distribution of Cu and Pb in the various facies of
these sediments.

Lew grade copper mineralisation in some Marinoan shale and
dolomite units is considered to be contemporaneous with sediment-
ation, The extensive enrichment of Pb in basal Cambrian sediments
is attributed to either a sedimentary exhalative process contempor+
aneous with sedimentation or later telethermal mineralisation
related to an Ordovician orogeny, Basement fault-shear lineaments
and areas of Pb and Cu enrichment are inter-related,

INTRODUCTION
Sinee 1960 over 4,000 bulk rock samples have been collected
by officers of the Geological Survey of South Australia from measured
rock sections and drill holes in Cambrian and Marinoan sediments.
The samples have been analysed for Pb, Zn, Cu, Ag, Cry Co, Ni, by ©
Australian Mineral Development Laboratories using a Baird 3 metre
grating spectrograph. Where required chemical analyses for Caco, >

Meco, and P, have also been made, The sections have all been

25 (
studied as stratigraphic columns with profile plots of the elements.
For this paper the Pb and Cu results for 10 sections on the
shelf and adjacent marginal geosynclinal zone are outlined in Tables

1 to 4.

Thé ‘results have been arranged in stratigraphic order and groupe!

‘ in the various sedimentary facies. Each rock sample analysed com—

prised a number of evenly spaced rock chips. The samples represent~
ing each facies are divided into two categories depending on metal

content, as follows:

 

“* Published with the consent of the Hon, The Minister of Mines.

(Contribution to Geological Session 1 on Structure and Geochemistry of
Sedimentary Basins, Eighth Commonwealth Mining & Metallurgical
Congress, Aust, &N,Z. - 1965).

===== page 3 (ocr)
6

2s

Category 1 Category 2

Pb 20 ppm or less Greater than 20 ppm
a

cu 30 ppm or less Greater than 30 ppm

The average for each facies is obtained in each category by
weighting results in proportion to the stratigraphic thickness
represented by the sample, In this way sm approximate value is
obtained for the overall metal content of each rock unit, Weather-
ing has affected the metal concentration of some surface samples,
particularly in the basal arenites of the Cambriani Most outcrops
sampled were however relatively free from weathering alteration,

_ GEOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENTS

Extensive areas of flat lying Marinoan sediments occur on the
Stuart Shelf, They are represented by the arenites of the Tent Hil’.
Formation and the underlying Tregolena or Woomera Shale. These
lutites are red-brown shales and siltstones with green shale lam-
inae,. Similar facies with the addition of dolomite occur in the
Wilpena Group to the east in the geosyncline and marginal area. .

The uppermost Precambrian unit in this Group is the Pound Quartzite.
The shelf and geosynclinal marginal zone is approximately defined by
fault lineaments and is transitional in, character. East of the she%’
zone the Marinoan sequences are folded ana are underlain by a thick
succession of glacio-marine sediments. Farther to the southeast ti...
Marinoan lutites become dominantly green in colour (Ulupa Siltstone;.

They are not represented in the tables, average metal contents are

_ Pb 13 ppm and Cu 20 ppm.

The Marinoan sequences and lithologies on the Stuart Shelf and
eastwards into the gcosyneline indicate that conditions were trans~
itional, The lutites represent shallow water muds deposited in an
extensive marine gulf. Conditions changed gradually to a littoral
or lagoonal environment at the close of Marinoan time with dominantly
arenite sedimentation,

The Lower Cambrian marked a striking return to a marine environ=
ment following a probable hiatus or,minor erosional event in the

shelf area. The base of the Cambrian is represented by arenites

===== page 4 (ocr)
3e

which are very thin in the shelf area but generally thicken greatly
in trough zones in ‘the geosyncline to the cast. The arenites grade
upward into a very thick carbonate sequence, the lower member is
dolomite but this tongues out to the cast within the great Wilkal-
willina and Parara Limestone succession, (Dalgarno, 1964). Later
in the Cambrian, lutites and an increasing proportion of arenites
were deposited, In Mid@le Cambrian time, marine carbonates were

again deposited,

DISTRIBUTION OF LEAD (TABLES aé 2)

The Marinoan lutites fall within ori, Close to the expected geo-
chemical range of lead content expected for! shales. The arenites
in the Kulpara and Sellick Hill sections show local high lecad con=
tents, These are attributed to later migration or mineralisation
in veins and fractures,

The Lower Cambrian sediments have striking lead concentrations
in the basal clastics and dolomites within the marginal geosynclinal
zone in many sections, (Thomson, 1962). ,

In the western shelf area, in the few sections sampled to date,
no lead enrichment has been found in the basal Cambrian. This
evidence, (Table 1), would appear to discount a sedimentary transfer
of lead-rich sediments across the shelf from a western source area.

The Ediacara Mineral Field, (Nixon, 1963), represents the
largest known lead concentration in the Lower Cambrian in South Aus-
tralia. Early production was mainly from enriched patches of car-
pbonate ore, subsequent extensive drilling by the Department of Mines
to date has outlined 17 million tons of 1.13% Pb. (Nixon, 1964,
unpub. Rept. R.B.58/135). Dominant mineralisation is galena.

The leed enrichment extends over a greater stratigraphic thick-
ness of the Lower Fresambrian scquence at Ediacara than in any other

section. yet sampled elsewhere in Sonth Australia, (see Table 2).

DISRIBUTION OF COP:=P (TAuL™S 3 & L)

The Marinoan lutites on the shes? Gites are genersily low in

 

copper. Copper is more abundant to the cast 2. ou 2s] zone of
the geosyncline, somc of the concentrations appear to be rélctes t,

later epigenetic mineralisation, Generally copper enrichment oce.,,

===== page 5 (ocr)
‘

A,

Gometimes with visible malachite staining-, in green shale phases of
the lutite, although not all green shales are cupriferous, Farther
east in the geosyncline in the areas covered by the Blinman and
Arrowie 1 mile shects a striking cuprifcrous unit occurs. This is
the Wearing Dolomite Member of the upper Marinoan lutite, the Bunyere.
Formation, The member is a persistent dolomite and shale unit sev-
eral feet t hick which has been mapped over a strike extent about LO
miles. Copper content is in places at least 2000 ppm. Traces of
copper sulphides are present. “

Further details have been published by Horwitz (1962) and the
writer?

The basal Cambrian in the eastern marginal zone shows an
association with traces of stratiform copper mineralisation, Small
copper ore bodies occur in cross cutting| structures in the Lower
Cambrian carbonates at a number of localities in the Flinders Ranges.

Copper concentrations of several hundred ppm, occur in red and
green siltstones in the late Lower Cambrian Billy Creek Formation,

Tuffaceous members are also associated with this Formation,
?

t a

GAWLER RANGE VOLCANICS

The Cambrian and Marinoan sedinients were derived from older
Precambrian rocks to the west and south of the shelf zone, The
Gawler Range Voleanics form extensive rock masses in this region and
were very probably exposed to erosion during part of Marinoan and
Cambrian time, ,

Reconnaissance sampling (170 samples) of the voleanics indicates
that they may havé an average; composition of about 10 ppm. Cu and

40 ppm Pb, and consequently ao’ not provide source material for the

sediments which are exceptionally rich in heavy metals.

ORIGIN OF THE LEAD AND COPPER

The cupriferous members in the Marinoan lutites appear to be

z

>,

contemporaneous with sedimentation in a marine environment, apparentl; &

under reducing conditions, The Wearing Dolomite Member is followed
—_—

*B. P, Thomson "Geology & Mineralisation in South Australia" in
“Geology of Aust. Ore Deposits” 8th Comm. Min. Met. (1965)
(in press),

===== page 6 (ocr)
et

5.

by a dolomite sequence with abundant algal structures. It is
possible that the extraction of copper from sea water was facilitated
by an organic process and later the metal was fixed by absorption on
clays, Large scale slumping accompanied by hinge line movement has

been observed in the geosynclinal area at about this time interval of
the Marinean, (Coats, 1964). The possibility of enrighment of the ,
bottom sediments in copper by subiiarine springs along hinge lines in
local basins must be considered. 4 ¥%

A sedimentary-exhalative origin for the lead in the basal Cam-

brian has. been suggested py the. wiser, Thomson (1 962). Contempor-

aneous enrichment ofthe sediments from below was attributed to sol-

 

utions or gases anat ing. along pasement failt lineaments. Canbrian
voleanic activity was in progress at this time in other parts of
Australia.

Continued regional mapping has given support. to the importance

_of lineaments in mineralisation: eontrol and the distribution of geo-

chemically high areas, Regional mapping evidenec now shows that
the Ediacara mineral field is, located on the castern side of a major
north~south fault or shear zone.

Any theory. of ore genesis must, take. these structural features.
into account. An alternative to the sedimentary—exhalative hypoth—
esis is to relate the basal Cambrian lead mineralisation to the wide-
spread Ordovician orogeny in South Australia which is becoming
apparent from Rb/Sr Age determinations (W. Compston, pers, comm. ).
This alternative hypothesis would suggest that telethermal solutions
rose along lineaments and deposited most of the lead in the covering
blanket of Cambrian. carbonate. Some solutions escaped to
higher levels in piercement structures or along active fault struc-
tures such as those known in Kangaroo Island and in Fleurieu Penin=

sula’ to: the south of Adelaide.

Sg RB

B. P. THOMSON,
SENIOR GEOLOGIST,
REGIONAL MAPPING SECTION.

 

BPT : EMD
6.1.65.

===== page 7 (ocr)
REFERENCES

HORWITZ, R.C., 1962 - Some Aspects of Metal Distribution
in Sediments of the Upper Proterozoic Lower
Cambrian of South Australia.
Eclogae Geol. Helv, Vol 4. 275-2

COATS, R.P., 1964 oy Large Scale Precambrian Slump
ttructures, Flinders Ranges.

Geol, Surv. S,Aust, Quart. Geol, Notes. No.11.

DALGARNO, C.R., 1964 - Lower Cambrian Stratigraphy of the
Flinders Ranges.

Trans, Roy, Soc: S.Aust. (in the press).

NIXON, L.G., 1963 - . The Ediacara Mineral Field.

Aust, IMM. Procecdings No. 206, 1863, pp.
93 - 1123

THOMSON, B.P., 1962 - Lead Distribution in Basal Cambrian
Sediments, South Australia,

Geol, Surv: S.Aust, Quart. Notes, No. 3.

===== page 8 (ocr)
TABLE 4 LEAD DISTRIBUTION IN SHELF SEDIMENTS

   

t = stratigraphic thickness sampled, in feet G4 = samples containing less than 20 ppm Pb
. n ='number of bulked samples analysed : G2 = sample containing more than 20 ppm Pb
rv 4 range of Pb content in parts per million ® “ * = evaporites we
dA came ee =

 

6 TA nantent in rarts ner mijlion : . x = single rock samples

===== page 9 (ocr)
MARINOAN

FACIES WOOMERA DoDeHe Noe 4

. r
622 | 8 |ro-24 | 5

 
    

TABLE 3. COPPER DISTRIBUTICGN IN SHELF SEDIMENTS

 

GOURLAY Lacoon

 

 

TEA TRES CREEK YARRAWUR T=, GREEK | MINLATION NO. 1 BORE

eT ee

3B

a
—

vr

| fe [eo] s

folate [| © |e

° . ¢{ = samples containing less than 30 ppm Gu
0:9 = anmnlaa pantaining mara than..20 pom tn

nN

2.-
4
2

4

2

a=trofetn]=

 

ny

===== page 10 (ocr)
Fi
Al

TABLE 2. LEAD DISTRIBUTION IN MARGINAL GEOSYIGLINE SEDIMENTS

SELLICK HILL WILKATANA DoDe1 EDLAGARA DD. E2h/64 ME. SCOTT

reece
EIGcace

limestond

Pep [ = [a
om eh pel ah pe liPPsle| at tata pele esta
Pes Se eel tate ee
14000+
was [as [ee [wom fe [ee fe] Je Pow)
pels feela ee Freel
pase [ae Doe fe ef Pe

| 140 | 5 | |20-25 | 175 50-400 158

HEE
500 | 5 |

 

===== page 11 (ocr)
TABLE 4. COPPER DISTRIBUTION IN MZRGINAL GEOSYNCLINE SEDIMENTS

SELLICK HILL WILKATANA D.DsHeNowt| BDIACARA DDH. BE 24/64 NT. SCOTT

|+ [=
ee
TT TEE

GAMBRLLN

hbo

limestongq

re = Ee}

MARINOAN

 

t = stratigraphic thickness sampled, in feet G4 = samples containing less than 30 ppm Cu .
n = number of bulked samples analysed . G2 = samples containing more than 30 ppm Gi nn ’ * a
“ r= range of Pb content in parts per million we ~

sad bebe peme an af EA anntant

===== page 12 (ocr)
 

by

B. P, Thomson
Geological Survey of South Australie

Systematic rock sampling of the Cambrian stratigraphic
unite was commenced by the Geological Survey in 1960. To date
ever 4,000 bulked. rock samples have been collected from measured
rook sections, and all have been snalysed spectrographically for
Pb, Zn, Cu, Ag, Gr, V, Go, Ni, at the Australian Mineral Develop~
ment Laboratories» Many of the Bjamples were also analysed for ,
Fe, Mn, Ba, and a special group wae tested for au, Bh, Ga, Ge,
Hg, Mo, Sb, Sns Analyses for HgGoz, CaCO,, and P were made
where considered necessarye |
, Cambrian cedimente in South Australia occur in two atotinet
environments.

1. Zoe Kenmanico Rrough Zone ;

Thies gone extends for ‘over 200 miles through Kangaroo :
feland and along the eastern flank of the Ht. Lofty Ranges. It
probably extends farther NE under the Tertiary Murray Basins The |
sediments are geosynclinal greywackes and arkoses with interbed=
Ged black pryitic shales and rare limestones. They include the
Nairne Pyrite member in the Brukunga Formation (Barker, 12 250,000
shect). The rocks are strongly folded, faulted, regionally meta-
morphosed and, in places, granitised and intruded by granite
piutons, basi¢ dykes and plugs. Cu, Pb, Ag, Au, Ag, Zn, mineral-

isation is known in the trough,

 

Areas of fossiliferous Lower to Hiddle Cambrian sediments
occur in a broad gone 350 miles iong, extending N from Kangaroo
Island and the western Ht. Lofty Ranges. Commencing with a well

|

defined basal clastic sequence , the sedimentary factes is domin=

antly carbonate passing upwards into green shale, red siltetones +
ana finally red clastics with minor carbongtess the rocks are
not metanorphosed. Dolerites of vrobable Cambrian age intrude

i
f
|
° L
t Q

===== page 13 (ocr)
mae

the underlying Adeleide Syetem sediments. Mineralisation ig Pb, |
AG, Cu, associated with Bas un ana Fes It 16 both stratiforn
and ercss cuttings : .

Be

 

a) Naixna Excite Kenan aioe | Sample traverses were made at
1 mile intervals and closer across the Nairne Pyrite member and
a higher pyritic members Cu and Pb. contents exceeding 1000 ppm
occur within the main and upper pyritie member at several points
betwean 5 miles 8, and 6 miles. N, of Brulungss A Pb anonaly area
was located in the upper horizon near Harrogate, and Ph 60,
mineralisation was subsequently found in this. lscalitye Parther
S and N, Cu and Pb results did not. exceed several hundred ppms
A sample traverse of 8 miles length along the Mt. Barker Creek,
south of the Callington=-Kanaantoo Gu mining eres, showed a marked
rise in heavy metal content in the Cambrian sediments at the o
Nairne Pyrite member, and the higher values gontinned in the overe
lying sediments.

. Over 160 lins-miles of regionel sample traversea have now
been completed across the expesed Kanmantoo Group sediments on
the mainland, Preliminary study. shows that a relatively high
heavy metal background 1s present within the metasediments in an
area between Strathalbyn, Brukunge and Callington. This area
‘Ancludes the most important Cu bodies an the regions fe sane
: sedinents, although ineluding pyritie black shales equivalent to
the Nairne Pyrite horidon,. are. tow in heavy motels between :

, Strathalbyn and the South Coasts

-The Brukunga formation, inciuding carbonaceous black
- Shales, is also developed in a ‘basin B and NE of 7 Truro. The for
“mation in this area is not associated with abnormal heavy netal
concentrations» oe a a :

(44) Palmer Rault Zone. Cu, Pb and Zn“anonalies were obtained
in a gone 20 milcs ong, adjacent to the Palner fault searp which
forna the NE Limit of the Mt. Lofty Ranges, Small Pb Hn bedies
Sceur in Lower Cambrian Limestone in this zone. Cu. is associated
with black shale (schist), quartz veing and basic rocks ineluding
amygdaloigal sndesites. mo :

===== page 14 (ocr)
Be

(441) Granites: A zone of granite intrusives and granitisea
' sediments extends from Murray Bridge to Angastone. The rocks in
this zone are gengrally low in heavy metales

(iv) Basic Iansous Rook: Extensive sampling of basic igneous
rocks away from Falmer fault area, “and. geapolitised miorodiorite
dykes NW of Brukunga did not show abnormal heavy metal contents.

Recently» pyrite-magnetité mineralisation was noted (JG,
Olliver pera, comme) is association with ecepolitised. nieredicrs
ite ‘auring aiamona a@rilling at Angastons meceimum Cu values were —
500 papets

(vt) Dawasley 4 . res
the vicinity of an aeromagnetic enomaly near Dawesley showed a Cu
anomaly, and one Mines Department a@vill intersection in primary
_ sulphides assayed over 1% Cus This mineralisation is associated
with pyrite and magnetite | and ‘46 located on a regional fracture

A gossan outcrop | in

 

systems ; .
(vit) Sudphovhile eleamte: Recently ari22 core from Brukunga
and surfaee samples across the Nairne Pyrite member at the Ht.
Barker Greek were analysed spectrographically for the sulphophile
elements Bi, Cay Ga, Ge, Hg, In, Me, Sb, Sn; a9 well ae Aus © -
Results were aa follows! Au, Cd, Ge, In were less than 2 Depots
Sn wes generally leas than 2 and rarely 10 pepeme, BL gensrelly 5
Depo. OF lossy Wo reaches a maximum of 80 pepems in the ardi.
section and 250 pepeme in the creek section. Mo is associated
with Hg (up to 162 pepame)

Gonslusion: Geochemical results and their relationship to
vegional geology have so far not proved any extensive atratifonm
mineralisation approaching ore erage. FPurther prospecting is
recommended along, and adjacent to, major fracture syeteme on
the margins of the high tenperature zones of ‘regional netamorphiam.

-

 

Over 2,100 surfate and drill hole bulk rock samples of
Cambrain stratigraphic units have been collected and analysed
from about 50 measured sections or drill holes. Six of theae —

===== page 15 (ocr)
  

-gections exiena fron basal to Middle Cambrian. The renainder are.
"generally reatricted $0. the basal, Cambrian. Teo
oo Cu-2n anomalice were. ‘obtained in “ferrdgifous’ and ‘mangante=
erous outerops ‘of the basal Cambrian at Kulpara» Yorke ‘Peninaulas. =
One hole was arilled in 1960 5 revealed a. week. lead anomaly. at the |
base of the Cenbriens | : So) : oo :
| Renewal of interest, in 196 an the Batecare FheAg ttera,
“whtch ogeurs, at the base or the, Canbrien, lea to. the subsequent: /

 

 

  

 

. widespread. geochemical’ invéstigation of thia stratigraphic

position. The deposits are of the Missiseippt Valley ‘Type. (iixon, | Ho
_-4963)6 The investigation showed that large areas oF: the: pasa .
“Gembrian tn the’ AdeLedge miogeosynoline havé a ‘gedchentoally. nigh

' Phy Zn and Cu contents ‘generally severe: hundred “Depeme Pb ana : 7
a occasionally nore.» ‘Areas alse exist: with jess: ‘than 39 Depen. Poe : :
“At Sellioke Hi21 near. “Adelaiae anomalies, of up to 5000 poms Po
ware obtained, ‘The. ‘Lead: anomalies oesur. dn calcareous ‘eria dolond= -
tie siltetones: above the basa) clastic “unit, ena belew the thick

 

 

 

 

‘gostonate sequence which ts ‘frequently oolitic in ‘tte: lowe oo a
, ‘members. The writer’ (moaaon, 1962) hes: attributed the: chigh Pb .
_ content to eontemporanesus ‘enrichnent’ af. the Cenbrian ‘seatmants | a
by exhelative solutions or gases which were introduced, along. we
' ‘Mneanents or. their’ intersections ‘an’ atepiric ‘areas.’ es oto
. Cu enonaites oceur an the. green. facies of the enale over~, a
- iying the Lower Canbrtan earbonate. Sequence, v ‘similar weak cu: .
anomalies are: “apsociat, with ‘green shale ‘end. ‘dolonite.. Anterbeds,
in the Belooracana Formation an the. usaare. ‘Combetans traces of |
Suto, and galena are present.” : a oe .
Stratize om ou. aseceiation with a thin green \ shale unit. ‘end .
dolomite. ina barren red ‘@iltetons: sequene is widespread (Horwsta Lo
1962) in the Central Flinders’ Ranges. in the: ipper Proterozete a8
(Wilpena Group). Bequences. cu content. of. the green, shale. ‘to. eo
: . frequently 2000 Pepele and of. ‘the Ped: el Seton, 20 BePee “Brecon, S

 

    

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

===== page 16 (ocr)
x

HORWITZ, Res 1962 (a) The Geology of the arrowie 2 Miadtary sheets

NIXON, LG. 4 1963.

THOMSON.» BePs, 1962

 

. Goole Surve SeAusty Repte Tavéstigations Bhs

= me Balacora Minerea Fields | -
Proceeding: Auste. Tolle Hos 306 5 pp+95-212.

‘Lead ototeteatien ta Basal Ceabrtan

Sediments, * South Australias ee :
quart. Geol. Notes Noe 3» July 29626

, Geol, BUrVe. South Aust, ,

