===== page 1 (text)
                     DEPARTMENT OF MINES
                          SOUTH AUSTRALIA




                      GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

                          1
                              }'' ' •' *




             ADELAIDE.GEOSYNCLINE AND STUART. SHELF.

                      SUNDRY MINERALISATION




                                     BY


                               R.K. JOHNS
                     v"

               ACTING DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF MINES



                                            Rept .No.   7'4/197
                                            G.S. No.    5512
                                            DM. No.     715/72

9th October, 1974.

===== page 2 (text)
     CONTENTS                                              PAGE


INTRODUCTION                                                1

MINERALISATION CONTROLS                                     3

MINERALISATION IN THE ADELAIDE GEOSYNCLINE                  k

MINERALISATION ON THE STUART SHELF                         11

SUMMARY                                                    15

REFERENCES                                                 16


                          .v ,;• FIGURES                          •?
          FIGURE NO.            TITLE                           PLAN NO,
                                                   A
                       ADELAIDE GEOSYNCLINE AND STURT
                                                   A


                       SHELF    -   MAP SHOWING RELATION          73-6
                       OF MINERALISATION TO STRUCTURE

===== page 3 (text)
                          INTRODUCTION


      The marked clustering of occurrences of base metal
and gold mineralisation in outcropping Precamlbrian and
Cambrian rocks in the eastern and central portion of
South Australia (Figure 1) clearly outlines the Adelaide
Geosyncline and"the bordering Stuart Shelf as a major
metallogenetic province (Dickinson & Sprigg, 1953;
Thomson, 1965)o    Copper is the major metal while gold,
lead, zinc and silver are widely distributed but have proved
to be of minor importance.

      Although silver-bearing lead ores were discovered
at Glen Osmond, and copper at Montacute, in 1841, it was
not until copper was discovered at Kapunda in 1842 that
widespread interest in metal mining was aroused in South
Australia.   Output of copper ore at Kapunda in the period
1842 to 1878 comprised 70 000 tonnes which yielded 13 000
tonnes of metal.    Ore production at Burra during the years
1844 to 1877, amounted to 700 000 tonnes from which 71 600
tonnes of copper were recovered.   Blinman, the largest and
most productive copper mine in the Flinders Ranges, was
operated during the period 1861 to 1918 when 200 000 tonnes
of ore were raised to yield 9 700 tonnes of copper metal.

      Throughout the State, over 800 named copper and 200
lead mines and prospects have been recorded and at least
80% of these are located within this province (Brown, 1908).
Until the end of World War I approximately 420 000 tonnes
of copper ore were produced, of which the Wallaroo and

===== page 4 (text)
                            - 2 -


Moonta Mines contributed 333 600 tonnes; most of the
remainder was derived from the area under review:*,
Smelters were constructed at a number of centres including
Mount Fitton South, Yudnamutana, Mount Rose, Mountain of
Light, Sliding Rock, Blinman, Prince Alfred, Spring
Creek, Burra, Kapunda, Kanmantoo and Mount Gunson but
these were mostly short-lived as ore reserves generally
proved to be insufficient to sustain their operation.
Mining was based on near-surface secondarily enriched
carbonate ores and almost without exception, the primary
sulphide zones proved to be too narrow and of too low
grade to be recoverable.

    Gold discoveries at Echunga in 1852, ^'followed by those
at Barossa (1868), Waukaringa (1872), Woodside (1882),
Mannahill (1885), Teetulpa (1886), Wadnaminga (1888) and
Mongolata (1930) resulted in comparatively small production.
Output of silver, lead and zinc have been unimportant.

    During the period 1920 to 1960 exploration for and
production of base metals were virtually at a stand still
thoUgh 1 100 tonnes of copper were recovered at the Broken
Hill Associated Smelters at Port Pirie from 32 000 tonnes
of ore mined at Mount Gunson during World War^II.     Few new
deposits were discovered during this time and exploration
was generally confined to sporadic and discouraging
investigations by a few exploration groups in areas of
previous mining activity.

    Active exploration was resumed throughout the region

===== page 5 (text)
                              - 3 -

in the mid 1960's to prove extensions to mineralised
zones at a number of old mining centres.      Geological
investigations have been supported by geochemistry as an
exploration method and by geophysics, particularly
induced polarisation techniques.; - follow-up drilling has
established reserves of recoverable sulphide ore at
Kanmantoo, of oxidized copper ores at Burra and at Mount
Gunson and of oxidized zinc ores at Puttapa and Aroona.
Elsewhere, significant concentrations of copper, lead
and zinc have been proven.



                MINERALISATION CONTROLS


    Figure 1 depicts the major faults and shears and the
relation of known copper lead/zinc and gold mineralisation
within Precambrian and Cambrian rocks of the Adelaide
Geosyncline and Stuart Shelf.   It is .apparent that the
density of regional fracturing add the distribution of
mineralisation are related.

    In the northern Flinders Ranges the major fault
lineaments trend NE-SW and NW-SE, conforming to the trend
of the Paralana/Anabama and Nor'West Fault systems and
confined by fundamental north-south trending systems, to
form a regular network of intersecting faults and shears.
These intersections, where imposed on structural culmin-
ations, controlled the emplacement of diapiric breccias
which are the loci of copper and barium mineralisation
through-out the Flinders Ranges.      Southwards the major
faults are generally directed meridionally and are arcuate

===== page 6 (text)
                           - 4 -

to the southwest in conformity with the prolongation of
Fleurieu Peninsula to Kangaroo Island.

    Orogenic movements which were initiated in the Cambrian
culminated in Grdovician igneous activity along the
eastern and southern margins of the belt.    This is
considered (Thomson, 1969) to have been the metallogenic
event responsible for the introduction of numerous small
metallic ore deposits at many stratigraphic levels through-
out the Adelaide Geosyncline.    The pattern of major faults
and shears, some of which hav-^-^eeh in^erinittently active
since the Proterozoic, dominate the geosynelinal zone
throughout its extent and is the major control in local-
isation of base metal and gold mineralisation.    Uncon-
formities have also played a primary role in controlling
mineral deposition not only in the Adelaide Geosyncline
but also on the Stuart Shelf.

    A zonation of lead/zinc, barytes, uranium and gold
is evident whereas copper is distributed throughout.



           MINERALISATION IN THE ADELAIDE GEOSYNCLINE

    Willouran sediments, whether in stratigraphic context
or exposed by emplacement in diapiric cores,, are hosts
to anomalous concentrations of     copper over wide areas.
Where they unconformably overlap crystalline basement rocks
of the Mount Painter Complex the Lower Callanna Beds and
succeeding units in the Yudnamutana" area are hosts to
numerous occurrences of copper Which were worked inter-
mittently during the period 1862 to 1920.     These comprise
defined lodes in fissure veins, stockworks and replacements

===== page 7 (text)
                          - 5 -

irf a restricted stratigraphic zone, penetrated by faulting
and in close proximity to the Mudnawatana Granite
(Blissett, 1971).

    Conglomerates, sandstones, siltstones and shales,
comprising units of the Upper Callanna Beds mark a
second transgressive phase in which there are concent-
rations of oxidized copper minerals, traceable from
O'Donoghue's Castle Mine, northwards to the Arkaroola
locality, round the basement core beyond the Blue Mine
to Yudnamutana.

    It is apparent that there is a close association of
copper with centres of diapiric intrusion throughout
the Flinders Ranges (Coats, 1964) and most mines are
situated within these structures, in adjacent rim rocks
or along faults which radiate from them.   The diapirs
result from the breaking out of Willouran dolomites,
shales, siltstones and sandstones from their confining
environment and their intrustion by plastic flowage and
injection into the overlying sedimentary cover in favour-
able structural situations.   Basic igneous intrusions are
generally associated with diapirism and these appear to
have played a role in introduction of copper.   Within
the Oraparinna Diapir a sequence of layered melaphyres
and basaltic lavas which are probable correlatives of
the Wooltana Volcanics include copper sulphides as
amygdule infillings (Johns, 1971).   An association of
copper with dolerite is apparent at Mount Lyndhurst,
Mount Burr, Booleroo, Mount Coffin, Mountain of Light,

===== page 8 (text)
                            - 6 -

Beltana, Loch Ness, Mucatoona, Blinman, Oraparinna,
Enorama, Arkaba,. Worumba, Spalding and .Burra.

    Within the diapiric structures, 'rafts' of intensely-
folded Willouran rocks are separated and disrupted by-
masses of breccia and, often,structureless dolomite.
Disseminated sulphides including chalcopyrite, of
apparent stratiform habit have been recognised in mopt
of the diapirs within dismembered dolomites that are
similar to those of the Wywyana Formation and in silt-
stones and shales comparable in lithology with certain
units of the River Wakefield Group.   Copper contents up
to 1% have been determined and are traceable in some cases
along strike for several kilometres within these structures.

    Blinman Mine was based on a tabular, oxidized ore
body enclosed by a raft of dolomite within the Blinman
Diapir.   The lode ranged from 10 ft. to 50 ft. in width
and was 350 ft. long and workings extend to a depth of
600 ft.   Copper contents ranged up to 30% (Dickinson, 19^2).

    Rocks of the Yudnamutana Sub-group which rest uncon-
formably on 'islands' of Willouran rocks, peripheral to
the Mount Lyndhurst, Mount Burr, Mount Coffin, Boolooroo
and Mountain of Light culminations contain copper
mineralisation, traceable within a narrow stratigraphic
interval of about 50 metres, discontinuously over strike
lengths of several tens of kilometres.   It is evident
that copper, derived from primary mineralisation within
the diapirs, has been redistributed by groundwater
circulation and facilitated by the brecciated host rocks,

===== page 9 (text)
                           - 7 -


adjacent to the unconformity.      The White Lead, Paull's
Consolidated, Victory, Elsie Adair, Mount Coffin and
                                                    j




Diamond Jubilee mines were based on concentration of
copper carbonate of this type.     Drilling at these
centres has demonstrated that irregular concentrations
of malachite, azurite and chalcocite occur above the
water table along bedding planes and cross cutting
fractures within shales, siltstones and tillitic
sandstones.
    The Prince Alfred and Red Hill mines disclose copper
mineralisation in the lower part of the Tapley Hill
Formation in proximity to an unconformity.
    In the southern Flinders Ranges and in the Mount
Loftly Ranges there are a number of previously worked
copper mines in which mineralisation has proven to be
weak, wall-rock alteration slight and the narrow low grade
siliceous veins emplaced along small faults, shear zones
and cleavage fractures.   Leaching and secondary enrichment
resulted in the accumulation of small high gracfe deposits
which have been formerly mined at a number of widely
scattered centres including Paratoo, Spring Creek, Baroota,
Mount Remarkable, Spalding, Stanley, Utica, Burra, Apoinga,
St. Elmo, Karkulto, Princess Royal, Montacute and Almanda.

    The Kapunda copper ore bodies are enclosed in
Sturtian kaolinitic siltstones at the crest of an antic-
line.   Thirty discrete veins consisting of carbonates,
oxides and secondary sulphides in quartz were mined with
some of the enclosing country rock in the zone of secondary
enrichment and in primary sulphides to a depth of 4250 ft.

===== page 10 (text)
                                    - 8 -


below the surface®             Recent drilling operations have
established several million tons of remnant oxidized
copper ores averaging 1% copper in the old mine area.

       Fault zones within Lower Camforian carbonate hosts
have been the loci of copper mineralisation at a
number of centres in the northern Flinders Ranges
including Sliding Rock, Red Range, Ajax, Copper King,
Mount Bayley, Angepena, Mount Chambers, Radford Creek
and W a r r a k i m b O o   The most important of these was
Sliding Rock and during the period 1871 to 1908 some
1 750 tonnes of rich carbonate ore and native copper
were recovered from above the water table.             At Mount
Arden, Kanyaka, Moro and Balcanoona shallow workings
were based on apparently stratiform copper carbonates
within the Parachilna Formation.

       Significant concentrations of lead and zinc with
minor copper have proven to be widely distributed
within carbonate rocks of the Lower Cambrian (Johns,
1972a)o        These deposits may be classified as
Mississippi Valley.type.            Oxidized lead and zinc
mineralisation, derived from stratifornr sulphides,
have been concentrated by circulating groundwaters in
and adjacent to major fault zones.

       Galena occurs as disseminations and in veinlets
in basal dolomites in proximity to the boundary fault
which determines the western margin of the Ediacara
Basin and in the matrix of leached collapse breccias
peripheral to the basin (Binks, 1972).             During the

===== page 11 (text)
                             - 9 -


period 1888 to 1913 about 24 000 tonnes of ore
averaging 31% lead and 8 ozs. of silver per tonne were
mined from shallow pits and underground galleries.
Drilling has outlined reserves of 30 million tonnes
over an average thickness of 20 metres with an average
grade of 0.9% lead (Nixon, 1967),

    Galena has been mined on a small scale at
Wirrealpa, Flinders, Fountain Head, Mount Lyall,
Mount Chambers, Parachilna and Rapid Bay.    Exploration
has disclosed base metal sulphides within Lower
Cambrian carbonates a,long the eastern and western
margins of the Flinders Ranges, the Torrens "hinge
zone" and adjacent to the coast between Sellick Hill
and Rapid Bay.

    Oxidized near-surface secondary concentrations of
willemite with associated lead minerals and manganese
and iron oxides have been located at Puttapa, Aroona
and at Third Plain.    Reserves of about one million
tonnes, ranging up to 52% zinc have been established by
drilling at Puttapa.

    Recent exploration has revealed the presence of
copper-molybdenite mineralisation in association with
Ordovician granites at Anabama, Netley and Bendigo
adjacent to the Anabama Fault.    A number of features,
including brecciation, hydrothermal alteration and type
of mineralisation invite comparisons with the porphyry
copper type.

===== page 12 (text)
                          - 10 -


    The several occurrences of known lead/zinc
mineralisation   in Adelaidean rocks have yielded quite
small production.    Thin cross cutting tabular veins
have been exploited at Appeallinna Well, Oodnapanakan
Hut, Ooloo, Constitution Hill, Mallee Hut and Gilead
P. Beck prospects.    Several hundred tons of galena
have been produced from four parallel lodes, one
metre in width, at the Avondale Mine and sphalerite
was encountered below the water table.    About 1 500
tonnes of 30% zinc ore were won from the Billy Springs
Mine, chiefly in the form of smithsonite which was the
principal ore in a complex of zinc, lead and copper
minerals.   There has been desultory production of
galena from the Baratta-Eukaby field.

    In the Olary area several unimportant occurrences
of galena are known at Trinkaleena, Wadnaminga, Vranes,
Lady Elizabeth, Uncle Tom and Winckler's prospects.

In the Mount Lofty Ranges the principal, now defunct,
lead mines include the Glen Osmond group, Morialta,
Hahndorf and Almanda.

    Gold is rare in the northern Flinders Ranges^
Small production has-been..derived from deposits..located
within or adjacent to diapirs at Boolooroo, Mount Ogilvie,
Angepena, Patawarta, and Mattwarangula and it is a .minor
associate of some copper ores.     In the Olary region
gold-bearing quartz reefs and stock-works have yielded
irregular values at King's Bluff, Nillinghoo, Wadnaminga,
Teetulpa, Mannahill and Kirkeeks Treasure.     Extensive

===== page 13 (text)
                           - 11 -


selective mining has been undertaken at the Waukaringa
Mine to yield an average battery return of 17 dwts. of
gold per tonne during the years 1872 to 1889.

    The Mount Grainger field produced 3 600 ozs. of
gold averaging almost 10 dwts. per tonne', from quartz
veins in kaolinised tillite in a structurally complex
zone.    At Mongolata gold occurs in quartz-limonite
veins in sandstone; between 1930 and 1940 approximately
7 500 tonnes of ore were treated for the recovery
of 11 000 ozs. of gold.  The workings extend over a
                                       i
strike length of three kilometres and attain 85 m in
depth.    In the same general! area relatively unimport-
ance occurrences of gold have been mined in the Pit-
cairn Range, at Minjibbie, Mittopitta and Ulooloo0
    In the Mount Lofty Ranges auriferous quartz reefs
within Adelaidean Rocks are rare and the Tertiary
placers appear to have been derived principally from
erosion of primary deposits within the crystalline
basemento


               MINERALISATION ON THE STUART SHELF

    Copper deposits were discovered adjacent to the
western shore of Pernatty Lagoon in 1875 and
desultory mining operations resulted in the production
of 3 250 tonnes of hand-dressed ore, generally
containing 8% to 16% copper in 1937.    During the period
1941 to 1943 a further 32 000 tonnes of ore were mined

===== page 14 (text)
                             - 12 -


for the production of 1 100 tonnes of copper metal
and 14 5^3 ozs. of silver.    Renewal of exploration
activity-in 1965 led to the re-opening of the mine
by Mount Gunson Pty. Ltd. in 1970 when open-cut
reserves were reported to total three million
tonnes of +1% copper ore.    The latest phase of mining
was based on the Gunyah deposits, underlying the floor
of an arm of Pernatty Lagoon, and chalcocite was
separated from the sandstone-quartzite host rocks by
flotation in a mill constructed on the adjacent
tableland.

    The known copper deposits comprise discrete, shallow,
more or less tabular bodies of generally low grade
that range up to 5 m in thickness and are concentrated
along unconformities which separate the Whyalla Sand-
stone and Woocalla Dolomite from the underlying Pandurra
Formation.    Copper minerals which include chalcocite,
bornite, covellite, malachite, atacamite and chrysocolla
occur as a cement to rounded quartz grains in the friable
Whyalla Sandstone and as infillings of irregular
fractures in cfense quartzite on the surface of the uncon-
formity.     Sulphides (principally chalcocite) occur in
the lagoon deposits and in the deeper levels of the
tableland workings while carbonates and silicates are
the common ores of copper in outcrop and where exposed
in the shallow tableland deposits.

    Copper also occurs within the Woocalla Dolomite,
occasionally in association with barytes, fluorite

===== page 15 (text)
                          - 13 -


and manganese at Mount Gunson in the Dolomite, Sweet
Nell and Fair Nell prospects,,

    Geological features of the Pernatty Lagoon-Mount
Gunson area have been previously reported by
Dickinson (19^2) and Johns (1968).   The results of
recent exploration undertaken in the region by -
Noranda Australia Ltd. have been reported by Johns
(1972b)o

    The Stuart Shelf comprises an underformed cratonic
cover of Adelaidean shallow water marine sediments
which rest on metamorphic and igneous rocks of the
Gawler Craton.   Pyroxene basalts of presumed
Willouran age and exceeding 200 m in thickness are
succeeded by the Pandurra Formation, a clastic sequence
of horizontally disposed quartzites at least 200 m
in thickness, that outcrops as an erosional high in the
"Pernatty Culmination".   Erosional irregularities of
the surface controlled the sedimentation of the Woocalla
Dolomite which rests unconformably on that surface
immediately to the west and south of Pernatty Lagoon.
The dolomite which ranges up to 150 m in thickness out-
crops along the western shore of Pernatty Lagoon.     It
exhibits features of shallow water deposition; intraf-
ormational breccias and crenulated bedding with abrupt
terminations are suggestive of a stf*bmatolite reef.
Drilling has indicated irregularities on the surface
of the Pandurra Formation in which finely |aminated
dolomites and shales have been deposited.   It is inferred

===== page 16 (text)
                            - 14 -


that these accumulated in a restricted lagoonal environ-
ment with marginal reef complexes about basement highs
which correspond to the Pernatty Culmination.

      The flat lying Tent Hill Formation is typically
exposed in tableland margins throughout the extent
of the Arcoona Plateau.    The lowermost Member, the
Whyalla Sandstone, rests disconformably on the Woocalla
Dolomite or, where this was eroded, directly on the
Pandurra- Formation.   The succeeding members include
Woomera Shale, Corraberra Sandstone and Arcoona Quart-
zite.

      Copper mineralisation appears to be concentrated in
the Whyalla Sandstone in the Pernatty Lagoon locality
adjacent to the stromatolite reed complex and marginal
to the Pernatty Culmination.    Zinc and lead, in subeconomic
concentrations, have been proven by drilling to occur
over a wide area in dolomitic black shales.    Mineralisation
consists of disseminated aggregates of pyrite, aphalerite,
galena and chalcopyrite ranging to 1 mm diameter.       Several
zones ranging up to 10 m in thickness have been proven
to contain 0.2%' lead and 0o3% zinc with some sections
2 m     in thickness containing in excess of 1.0% combined
sulphides.

      Though no economic concentrations of lead or zinc
have disclosed the existence of geochemically anomalous
levels of base metal mineralisation have been established
in a stratiform setting over a wide area.     The localisation
of mineralisation is considered to have been governed

===== page 17 (text)
                              - 15 -


by several possible controls including the proximity .
of the Pernatty Culmination, a positive structural
feature which had a profound influence on sedimentation
and the unconformities separating reef dolomite, a black
shale facies and sandstones,

a'

                           . SUMMARY


     It is considered that widespread base metal deposits
of the Adelaide Geosyncline were emplaced during the
Ordovician.     Copper is the major metal with lead, zinc
and gold of lesser importance.

     Structural control has been of paramount importance
in localising     diapiric emplacement and dolerite intrusion
and in providing channel ways for circulation of mineral-
ising fluids in proximity to intrusive centres and the
mobilisation and concentration of deep seated mineralisation,,

     The role of unconformities in ore localisation within
the geosyncline and on the Stuart Shelf is stressed since
they provided favourable loci for introduced mineralisation
and potential aquifers for ore fluids„

     Deep weathering and prolonged subaerial erosion on
base levelled surfaces during the Cainozoic era resulted
in the leaching and redistribution of earlier deposits
and favoured the accumulation of high grade secondarily
enriched mineral deposits•

===== page 18 (text)
4




                                        -   16   -

                                      REFERENCES

        Binks, P.Jo, (1972).      Lake Cainoz'oic uplift of the Ediacara
    i               Range, South Australia. Ppoc. Aust. Inst. Min.
                    Met, Noo'~243 pp. 47-55.

        Blissett, A.H., (1971),      Regional and economic geology of
                    the Mount Painter Province. Bull. Geol.
                    Surv. S. Aust. No, 43.

        Brown, H.Y.L., (1908),      Record of the Mines of South
                    Australia 4th Ed. Govt. Printer, Adelaide,
                    1908 (reprinted 1968),

        Coa,t^s, R.P., (1964),    Geology of the Blinman Dome Diapir.
                    Dept. Mines S. Aust, Rep. Invest. No. 25•

        Dickinson, S.B., (1942)0      The structural .control of ore
                    deposition in some South Australian copper
                    fields. No. 1 Bull. Geol. Surv. S. Aust. No, 20,

                   , (1944),      The structural control of ore deposition
                    in some South Australian copper fields No, 2
                                                            1
                    Bull. Geol. Surv, So Aust. No. 20.

                   , and Sprigg, R.C. (1953),          Geological Structure
                    of South Australia in relation to mineralisation
                    in Geology of Australian ore deposits         1st Ed,
                    (Ed. A.B. Edwards) pp. 426-448          (5th Emp. Min.
                   Met. Congr, Melbourne),

        Johns, R.K., (1968),      Geology and mineral resources of the
                    Andamooka-Torrens area.          Bull, Geol. Surv. S.
                    Aust.   38.

===== page 19 (text)
f       4




                                         - 17 -



    B       Johns, R.R., (1971).     Exploration for copper in the
    ™                  Oraparinna and Enorama Diapirs.    Min* Res.
    •                  Rev., Adelaide 131:     104-114.

                  , (1972A)0    Base.metal occurrences within Lower
    M                  Cambrian sediments of the northern Flinders
    •                  Ranges. Dept. Mines. S. Aust. Rep. Invest.
                      No. 37.

    I             , (1972B).    Basemetal mineralisation in the Pernatty
    m                  Lagoon region, South Australia. Dept. Mines
                       S. Aust. Rep. Invest.

    |       Nixon, L.G.B., (1967).     Ediacara Mineral Field   Min. Rev.
    _                 Adelaide,     120 : 17-24.

            Thomson, B.P., (1965).    Geology and mineralisation of South
    I                  Australian in Geology of Australian Ore Deposits
                       2nd Ed. (Ed. J. McAndrew). pp. 270-284
    •                  (8th Comm.
                                     in.Meto Congr0 Australia and New
    •                  Zealand).

              . ... t (1969)o in Handbook of South Australian Geology.
    |                  pp0     49-83. Geol. Surv. S. Aust. Ed. L.W. Parkin.

===== page 20 (text)
A D E L A I D E G E O S Y N C L I N E A N D S T U A R T S H E L F - MAP S H O W I N G
            R E L A T I O N OF M I N E R A L I S A T I O N T O S T R U C T U R E

